Silverthorn
raymond E. Feist
the riftware saga
book 2
A poisoned bolt has struck down the Princess Anita on the day of her
wedding to Prince Arutha of Krondor.

To save his beloved, Arutha sets out in search of the mytics herb
called Silverthorn that only grows in the dark and forbidding land of
the Spellweavers.

Accompanied by a mercenary, a minstrel, and a clever young thief, he
wil confront an ancient evil and do battle with the dark powers that
threaten the enchanted realm of Midkemia.

"I found Silverthorn to be as exciting and absorbing as Magician in
every way. The excellent characterization wedded to a tight and
well-tuned plot makes it one of the outstanding fantasy offerings of
the season." --Andre Norton


Prologue
Twilight

The sun dropped behind the peaks.
The last rays of warmth touched the earth and only the
rosy afterglow of the day remained. From the east, indigo
darkness approached rapidly. The wind cut through the
hills like a sharp-edged blade, as if spring were only a
faintly remembered dream. Winter's ice still clung to
shadow-protected pockets, ice that cracked loudly under
the heels of heavy boots. Out of the evening's darkness
three figures entered the firelight.
The old witch looked' up, her dark eyes widening
slightly at the sight of the three. She knew the figure on
the left, the broad, mute warrior with the shaved head
'and single long scalp lock. He had come once before,
seeking magic signs for strange rites. Though he was a
powerful chieftain, she had sent him away, for his nature
was evil, and while issues of good and evil seldom held
any significance for the witch, there were limits even for
her. Besides, she had little love for any moredhel,
especially one who had cut out his own tongue as a sign
of devotion to dark powers.
The mute warrior regarded her with blue eyes, unusual
for one of his race. He was broader of shoulder than
most, even for one of the mountain clans, who tended to
be more powerful of arm and shoulder than their forest-
dwelling cousins. The mute wore golden circle rings in his
large, upswept ears, painful to affix, as the moredhel had
no lobes. Upon each cheek were three scars, mystic
symbols whose meaning was not lost upon the witch.
The mute made a sign to his companions, and the one
to the far right seemed to nod. It was difficult to judge,
he was clothed in an all-concealing robe, with a deep
hood revealing no features. Both hands were hidden in
voluminous sleeves that were kept together. As if speak-
ing from a great distance, the cloaked figure said, 'We
seek a reading of signs.' His voice was sibilant, almost a
hiss, and there was a note of something alien in it. One
hand appeared and the witch Pulled away, for it was
misshapen and scaled, as if the owner possessed talons
covered with snakeskin. She then knew the creature for
what it was: a priest of the Pantathian serpent people.
Compared to the serpent people, the moredhel were held
in high regard by the witch.
She turned her attention from the end figures and
studied the one in the centre. He stood a full head taller
than the mute and was even more impressive in bulk. He
slowly removed a bearskin robe, the bear's skull providing
a helm for his own head, and cast it aside. The old witch
gasped, for he was the most striking moredhel she had
seen in her long life. He wore the heavy trousers, jerkin,
and knee-high boots of the hill clans, and his chest
was bare. His powerfully muscled body gleamed in the
firelight, and he leaned forward to study the witch. His
face was almost frightening in its near-perfect beauty.
But what had caused her to gasp, more than his awesome
appearance, was the sign upon his chest.
'Do you know me?' he asked the witch.
She nodded. 'I know who you appear to be.'
He leaned even farther forward, until his face was lit
from below by the fire, revealing something in his nature.
'I am who I appear to be,' he whispered with a smile. She
felt fear, for behind his handsome features, behind the
benign smile, she saw the visage of evil, evil so pure it
defied endurance. 'We seek a reading of signs,)' he
repeated, his voice the sound of ice-clear madness.
She chuckled. "Even one so mighty has limits?'
The handsome moredhel's smile slowly vanished. 'One
' may not foretell one's own future.'
Resigned to her own likely lot, she said, 'I require
silver.'
 The moredhel nodded. The mute dug a coin from out
of his belt pouch and tossed it upon the floor before the
witch. Without touching it, she prepared some ingredients
in ,a stone cup. When the concoction was ready, she
poured it upon the silver. A hissing came, both from the
coin and from the serpent man. A green-scaled claw
began to make signs, and the witch snapped, 'None of
that nonsense, snake. Your hot-land magic will only cant
my reading.'
The serpent man was restrained by 'a gentle touch and
smile from the centre figure, who nodded at the witch.
In crroaking tones, her throat dry with fear, the witch
said, 'Say you then truly: What would you know?' She
studied the hissing silver coin, covered now in bubbling
green slime.
is it time? Shall I do now that which was ordained?'
A bright green flame sprang from the coin and danced.
The witch followed its movement closely, her eyes seeing
something within the flame none but she could divine.
After a while she said, "The Bloodstones form the Cross
of Fire. That which you are, you are. That which you are
born to do, . . . do!' the last word was a half-gasp.
Something in the witch's expression was unexpected,
for the moredhel said, 'What else, crone?'
"you stand not unopposed, for there is one who is your
bane. You stand not alone, for behind you . . . I do not
understand.' Her voice was weak, faint.
'What?' The moredhel showed no smile this time.
"Something . . . something vast, something distant
something evil.'
The moredhel paused to consider, turning to the ser-
pent man, he spoke softly yet commandingly. "Go then,
Cathos. Employ your arcane skills and discover where

this seat of weakness lies. Give a name to our enemy.
Find him.'
The serpent man bowed awkwardly and shambled out
of the cave. The moredhel turned to his mute companion
and said, "Raise the standards, my general, and gather
the loyal clans upon the plains of Isbandia, beneath the
towers of Bar-Sargoth. Raise highest that standard I have
chosen for my own, and let all know we begin that which
was ordained. You shall be my battlemaster, Murad, and
all shall know you stand highest among my servants.
Glory and greatness now await.
'Then, when the mad snake has identified our quarry,
lead forth the Black Slayers. Let those whose souls are
mine serve us by seeking out our enemy. Find him!
Destroy him! Go!'
The mute nodded once and left the cave. The moredhel
with the sign on his chest faced the witch. "Then, human
refuse, do you know what dark powers move?'
"Aye, messenger of destruction, I know. By the Dark

Lady, I know.'
He laughed, a cold humourless sound. 'I wear the sign,'
he said, pointing to the purple birthmark upon his chest,
which seemed to glow angrily in the firelight. It was clear
that his was no simple disfigurement but some sort of
magic talisman, for it formed a perfect silhouette of a
dragon in flight. He raised his finger, pointing upwards. "I
have the power.' He made a circular motion with his
upraised finger. 'I am the foreordained. I am destiny.'
The witch nodded, knowing death raced to embrace
her. She suddenly mouthed a complex incantation, her
hands moving furiously through the air. A gathering of
power manifested itself in the cave and a strange keening
filled the night. The warrior before her simply shook his
head. She cast a spell at him, one that should have
withered him where he stood. He remained, grinning at
her evilly. 'You seek to test me with your puny arts,
seer?'
seeing no effect, she slowly closed her eyes and sat
erect, awaiting her fate. The moredhel pointed his finger
at her and a silver shaft of light came forth, sinking the
witch. She shrieked in agony, then exploded into white-
hot fire. For an instant her dark form writhed within the
inferno, then the flames vanished.
The moredhel cast a quick glance at the ashes upon the
floor, forming the outline of a body. With a deep laugh
he gathered up his robe and left the cave.
Outside, his companions waited, holding his horse. Far
below he could see the camp of his band, still small but
destined to grow. He mounted and said,
'To Bar-Sargoth!' WIth a jerk on the reins he spun his horse and led the
mute and the serpent priest down the hillside.

1

Reunion

The ship sped home.
The wind changed quarter and the captain's voice rang
out, aloft, his crew scrambled to answer the demands of a
freshening breeze and a captain anxious to get safely to
port. He was a seasoned sailingmaster, nearly thirty years
in the King's navy, and seventeen years commanding his
own ship; And the Royal Eagle was the best ship in the
King's fleet, but still the captain wished for just a little
more wind, just a little more speed, since he would not
rest until his passengers were safely ashore.
Standing upon the foredeck were the reasons for the
captain's concern, three tall men. Two, one blond and
one dark, were standing at the rail, sharing a joke, for
they both laughed. Each stood a full four inches over six
feet, and each carried himself with the sure step of a
fighting man or hunter. Lyam, King of the Kingdom of
the Isles, and Martin, his elder brother and Duke of
Crydee, spoke of many things, of hunting and feasting, of
travel and politics, of war and discord, and occasionally
they spoke of their father, Duke Borric.
The third man, not as tall or as broad of shoulder as
the other two, leaned against the rail a short way off, lost
in his own thoughts. Arutha, Prince of Krondor and
youngest of the three brothers, also dwelt upon the past,
but his vision was not of the father killed during the war
with the Tsurani, in what was now being called the
Riftwar. Instead he watched the bow wake of the ship as
it sliced through emerald-green waters, and in that green
he saw two sparkling green eyes.
The captain cast a glance aloft, then ordered the sails
trimmed. Again he took note of the three men upon the
fOredeck and again he gave a silent prayer to Kilian,
Goddess of Sailors, and wished Rillanon's tall spires were
in sight. For those three were the three most powerful
and important men in the Kingdom, and the sailingmaster
refused to think of the chaos that would befall the
Kingdom should any ill chance visit his ship.
Arutha vaguely heard the captain's shouts and the
replies of his mates and crew. He was fatigued by the
events of the last year, so he paid little attention to what
was occurring about him. He could keep his thoughts
only upon one thing: he was returning to Rillanon, and
to Anita.
Arutha smiled to himself. His life had seemed unremarkable
for the first eighteen years. Then the Tsurani
invasion had come and the world had been forever
changed. He had come to be counted one of the finest
commanders in the Kingdom, had discovered an unsuspected
eldest brother in Martin, and had seen a thousand
horrors and miracles. But the most miraculous thing that
had happened to Arutha had been Anita.
They had been parted after Lyam's coronation. For
nearly a year Lyam had been displaying the royal banner
to both eastern lords and neighbouring kings, and now
they were returning home.
Lyam's voice cut through Arutha's reverie. 'What see
you in the wave's sparkle, little brother?'
Martin smiled as Arutha looked up, ' and the former
Huntmaster of Crydee, once called Martin Longbow,
nodded towards his youngest brother. 'I wager a year's
taxes he sees a pair of green eyes and a pert smile in the
waves.'
Lyam said; 'No wager, Martin. Since we departed
Rillanon I've had three messages from Anita on some
matter or other of state business. All conspire to keep
her in Rillanon while her mother returned to their estates
a month after my coronation. Arutha, by rough estimate,
has averaged better than two messages a week from her
the entire time. One might draw a conclusion or two
from that.'
"I'd be more than anxious to return if I had someone of
her mettle waiting for me,' agreed Martin.
Arutha was a private person, ill humoured when it
came to revealing deep feelings, and he was doubly
sensitive to any question involving Anita. He was imposseibly
in love with the slender young woman, intoxicated
with the way she moved, the way she sounded, the way
she looked at him. And while these were possibly the
only two men on all Midkemia to whom he felt close
enough to share his feelings, he had never, even as a boy,
shown good grace when he felt he was the butt of a jest.
As Arutha's expression darkened, Lyam said, "Put
away your black looks, little storm cloud. Not only am I
your King, I'm still your older brother and I can box your
ears if the need arises.'
The use of the pet name their mother had given him
and the improbable image of the King boxing the ears of
the Prince of Krondor made Arutha smile slightly. He
was silent a moment, then said, 'I worry I misread
this. Her letters, while warm, are formal and at times
distant. And there are many young courtiers in your
palace.'
Martin said, 'From the moment we escaped from
Krondor, Your fate was sealed, Arutha. She's had you in
her bow mark from the first, like a hunter drawing down
on a deer. Even before we reached Crydee, when we
were hiding out, she'd look at you in a certain way. No,
she's waiting for you, have no doubt.'
"Besides,' added Lyam, 'you've told her how you feel.'
"Well, not in so many words. But I have stated my
fondest affection.'
Lyam and Martin exchanged glances. 'Arutha,' said
Lyam, 'you write with all the passion of a scribe doing
year-end tax tallies.
All three laughed. The months of travel had allowed a
redefinition of their relationship. Martin had been both
tutor and friend to the other two as boys, teaching hunting
and woodcraft. But he had also been a commoner, though
as Huntmaster he stood as a highly 'placed member of
duke Borric's staff. With the revelation that he was their
father's bastard, an elder half brother, all three had
passed through a time of adjustment. Since then they had
endured the false camaraderie of those seeking advantage,
the hollow promises of friendship 'and loyalty from
those seeking gain, and during this time they had discovered
something more. In the others, each had found
two men who could be trusted, who could be confided in,
who understood what this sudden rise to preeminence
meant, and who shared the pressures of newly inflicted
responsibilities. In the other two, each had found friends.
Arutha shook his head, laughing at himself. 'I guess I
have known from the first as well, though I had doubts.
She's so young.'
Lyam said,) "About our mother's age when she wed
Father, you mean?'
Arutha fixed Lyam with a sceptical look. 'Do you have
an answer for everything?'
Martin clapped Lyam on the back. of course,' he said.
Then softly he added, "That's why he's the King.' As
Lyam turned a mock frown upon Martin, the eldest
brother continued. 'So when we return, ask her to wed,
dear brother. Then we can wake old Father Tully from
before his fireplace and we can all be off to Krondor and
have a merry wedding. And I can stop all this bloody
travel and return to Crydee.'
A voice from above cried out, 'Land ho!'
'Where away?' shouted the captain.
"Dead ahead.'
Gazing into the distance, Martin's practised hunter's
eye was the first to perceive the distant shores. Quietly
he placed his hands upon his brothers' shoulders. After a
time all three could see the distant outline of tall towers
against an azure sky.
Softly Arutha said, 'Rillanon.'

The sounds of the light tapping of footfalls and the rustle
of a full skirt held above hurrying feet accompanied the
sight of a slender figure marching purposefully down a
long hallway. 'The lovely features of the lady rightly
acknowledged the reigning beauty of the court were set
in an expression of less than pleasant aspect. The guards
posted along the hall stood face front, but eyes followed
her passage. More than one guard considered the likely
target of the lady's well-known temper and smiled
inwardly. The singer was in for a rude awakening,
literally. In a most unladylike fashion, Princess Carline, sister to
the King, swept past a startled servant who tried to jump
aside and bow to her at the same time, a feat that landed
him on his backside as Carline vanished into the guest
wing of the palace.
Coming to a door, she paused. Patting her loose dark
hair into place, she raised her hand to knock, then halted.
Her blue eyes narrowed as she became irritated by the
thought of waiting for the door to open, so she simply
pushed it open without announcing herself.
The chamber was dark, as the night curtains were still
drawn. The large bed was occupied by a large lump
beneath the blankets that groaned as Carline slammed
the door behind her. Picking her way across the clothing-strewn
floor, she yanked aside the curtains, admitting the
brilliant midmorning light. Another groan emitted from
the lump as a head with two red-rimmed eyes peeked out
over the bedcovers. 'Carline,' came the dry croak, 'are
you trying to wither me to death?'
Coming to stand over the bed, she snapped, 'if you
hadn't been carousing all night, and had been to breakfast
as expected, you might have heard that my brothers' ship
had been sighted. They'll be at the dock within two
hours.'
Laurie of Tyr-sog, troubadour, traveLer, former hero
of the Riftwar, and lately court minstrel and constant
companion to the Princess, sat up, rubbing at tired eyes.
'I was not carousing. The Earl of Dolth insisted on
hearing every song in my repertoire. I sang until near
dawn.' He blinked and smiled up at Carline. 'Scratching
at his neatly trimmed blond beard, he said, 'The man
has inexhaustible endurance, but also excellent taste in
music.'
Carline sat on the edge of the bed, leaned over, and
kissed him briefly. She deftly disengaged herself from
arms that sought to entangle her, Holding him at bay
with her hand upon his chest, she said, 'Listen, you
amorous nightingale, Lyam, Martin, and Arutha will be
here soon, and the minute Lyam holds court and gets all
the formalities done with, I'm talking to him about our
marriage . '
, Laurie looked around as if seeking a corner in which
to disappear. Over the last year their relationship had
developed in depth and passion, but Laurie had a near-reflexive
avoidance of the topic of marriage. "Now, Carline- '
he began. "'
"Now, Carline," indeed!' she interrupted with a jab of
her finger into his bare chest. "You buffoon, I've had
eastern princes, sons of half the dukes in the Kingdom,
and who knows how many others simply begging for
permission to Pay court to me. And I've always ignored
them. And for what? So some witless musician can trifle
'with my affections? Well, we shall have an accounting.'
Laurie grinned, pushing his tousled blond hair back
He sat up and, before she' could move, kissed her deeply.
When he pulled away, he said, 'Carline, love of my
being, please. We've covered this ground.'
Her eyes, which had been half-closed during the kiss,
instantly widened. 'Oh! We've covered this ground
before?' she said, infuriated. "We will be married. That is
final.' She stood up to avoid his embrace again. 'it has
become the scandal .of the court, the Princess and her
minstrel lover. It's not even an original tale. I am becoming
a laughing-stock. Damn it all, Laurie, I'm nearly
twenty-six. Most women my age are eight, nine years
married. Would you have me die a spinster?'
'Never that, my love,' he answered, still amused.
Besides the fact of her beauty, and the slim chance of
anyone's calling her an old maid, she was ten years
his junior and he regarded her as young, a perception
constantly furthered by her outbursts of childish temper.
He sat up fully and spread his hands in a gesture of
helplessness as he stifled his mirth. 'I am what I am,
darling, no more or less. I've been here longer than I've
been anywhere when I was a free man. I'll admit, though,
this is a far more pleasant captivity than the last.' He was
speaking of the years he had been a slave on Kelewan,
the Tsurani homeworld. 'But you'll never know when I'll
want to roam once more.' He could see her temper rising
as he spoke, and was forced to admit to himself that he
was often what brought out the worst in her nature. He
rapidly changed tack. "Besides, I don't know if I'd make
a good . . . whatever the husband of the King's sister is
called.'
'Well, you'd better get used to it. Now get up and get
dressed.'
Laurie grabbed the trousers she tossed to him and
quickly put them on. When he was finished dressing he
stood before her and put his arms around her waist.
.Since the day we met I have been your adoring subject,
Carline. I have never loved, nor will I love, anyone as I
love you, but - '
"I know. I have had months of the same excuses.' She
jabbed him in the chest again. "You've always been a
traveller,' she mocked. 'You've always been free. You
don't know how you would fare being tied to one spot -
though I've noticed you've managed to endure settling
down here in the King's palace.'
Laurie cast his eyes heavenwards. 'This is true enough.'
.Well, lover mine, those excuses may serve you as you
bid farewell to some poor tavern keeper's daughter, but
they'll do you little good here. We shall see what Lyam
thinks of all this. I should imagine there is some old law
or other in the archives dealing with commoners becoming
involved with nobles.'
Laurie chuckled. "There is. My father is entitled to a
golden sovereign, a pair of mules, and a farm for your
having taken advantage of me.
Suddenly Carline giggled, tried to smother it, then
laughed aloud. 'You bastard.' Tightly hugging him, she
rested her head upon his shoulder and sighed. 'I can
never stay angry with you.
He cradled her gently in the circle of his arms. 'i do
give you reason upon occasion,' he said softly.
"Yes, you do.'
'Well, not all that often.'
'Look you well, boyo,' she said. 'My brothers are
nearing the harbour as we speak, and you stand here
arguing. You may dare make free with my person, but
the King may take a dim view of things as they stand.'
"so I have feared,' Laurie said, with obvious concern in
his voice.
Suddenly Carline's mood softened. Her expression
changed to one of reassurance. 'Lyam will do whatever I
ask. He's never been able to say no to anything I've truly
asked for since I was tiny. This is not Crydee. He knows
things are different here, and that I'm no longer a child.'
'So I have noticed.'
'Rogue. Look, Laurie. You're no simple farmer or
cobbler. You speak more languages than any "educated"
noble I have known. You read and write. You have
traveLed widely, even to the Tsurani world. You have
wits and talents. You are much more able to govern than
many who are born to it. Besides, if I can have an older
brother who was a hunter before becoming a duke, why
not a husband who was a singer?'
'Your logic is impeccable. I simply don't have a good
answer. I love you without stint, but the rest - '
'Your problem is you have the ability to govern, but
you just don't want the responsibility. You're lazy.'
He laughed. "That's why my father tossed me out of
the house when I was thirteen. Said I'd never make a
decent farmer.'
She pushed away from him gently, her voice taking on
a serious note. "Things change, Laurie. I've given this
much consideration. I thought I was in love before, twice,
but you're the only man who could get me to forget who
I am and act this shamelessly. When I'm with you,
nothing makes sense, but that's all right, because then I
don't care if the way I feel makes sense. But now I must
care. You'd better make a choice, and make it soon. I'll
bet my jewels Arutha and Anita will announce they are
betrothed before my brothers are in the palace a day.
Which means we'll all be off to Krondor for their
wedding.
'When they are wed, I'll return here with Lyam. It will
be up to you to decide if you will be coming back with us,
Laurie.' She locked gazes with him. 'I have had a wonderful
time with you. I've feelings I couldn't imagine possible
when I dreamed my ~girl's dreams of pug and then roland.
But you must get ready to choose. You are my first lover,
and will always be my dearest love, but when I return
here you will be either my husband or a memory.'
Before he could answer, she walked to the door. 'in all
ways I love you, rogue. But time is short.' She paused.
'Now come along and help me greet the King.'
He came to her side and opened the door for her.
They hurried to where carriages were waiting to take the
reception committee to the docks. Laurie of Tyr-sog,
troubadour, traveLer, and hero of the Riftwar, was acutely
aware of the presence of this woman at his side and
wondered how it would feel to be denied that presence
for good and all. He felt decidedly unhappy at the
prospect.

Rillanon, capital of the Kingdom of the Isles, waited to
welcome home her King. The buildings were bedecked in
feStive bunting and hothouse flowers. Brave pennants
flew from the rooftops and bold banners of every colour
were strung between the buildings over the streets the
King would travel. Called Jewel of the Kingdom, Rillanon
reSted upon the slopes of many hills, a marvellous place
of graceful spires, airy arches, and delicate spans. The
late King, Rodric, had embarked upon a restoration of
the city, adding lovely 'marble and quartz stone facing to
most of the buildings before the palace'; rendering the
city a sparkling wonderland in the afternoon sunlight.
The Royal Eagle approached the King's dock, where
the welcoming party waited. In the distance, upon those
buildings and hillside streets affording a clear view of the
dock, throngs of citizens were cheering the return of their
'young King. For many years Rillanon had abided under
the black cloud of King Rodric's madness, and though
Lyam was still a stranger to most of the city's populace,
he was adored, for he was young and handsome, his
bravery in the Riftwar was widely known, and his generosity
had been great. He had lowered taxes.
with a master's ease, the harbour pilot guided the
King's ship into its appointed place. It was quickly made
secure and the gangway run out.
Arutha watched as Lyam was the first to descend. As
tradition dictated, he dropped to his knees and kissed the
soil of his homeland. Arutha's eye's scanned the crowd,
seeking Anita, but in the press of nobles moving forward
to greet Lyam he saw no sign of her. A momentary cold
stab of doubt struck him.
Martin nudged Arutha, who, protocol dictated, was
expected to be the second to disembark. Arutha hurried
down the gangway, with Martin a step behind. Arutha's
attention was caught by the sight of his sister leaving the
side of the singer, Laurie, to rush forward and fiercely
hug Lyam. While others in the reception committee were
not as free with ritual as Carline, there was a spontaneous
cheer from the courtiers and guards awaiting the King's
pleasure. Then Arutha had Carline's arms about his neck
as she bestowed a kiss and hug on him. 'Oh, I've missed
your sour looks,' she said happily.
Arutha had been wearing the dour expression he exhibited
when lost in thought. He said, 'What sour looks?'
Carline looked up into Arutha's eyes and, with an
innocent smile, said, 'You look as if you'd swallowed
something and it moved.'
Martin laughed aloud at that, then Carline was hugging
him in turn. He stiffened at first, for he was still less
comfortable with a sister than with two brothers, then he
relaxed and hugged her back. Carline said, 'i've grown
bored without you three around.'
Seeing Laurie a short distance off, Martin shook his
head. 'Not too bored, it seems.'
Carline playfully said, 'There's no law that says only
men can indulge themselves. Besides, he's the best man
I've met who's not my brother.' Martin could only smile
at that while Arutha continued looking for Anita.
Lord Caldric, Duke of Rillanon, First Adviser to the
King, and Lyam's great-uncle, smiled broadly as the
King's huge hand engulfed his own in a vigorous shake.
Lyam nearly had to shout over the cheers from those
nearby. "Uncle, how stands our Kingdom?'
"Well, my King, now that you've returned.'
As Arutha's expression grew more distressful, Carline
said, 'put away that long face, Arutha. She's in the
eastern garden, waiting for you.'
Arutha kissed Carline's cheek, hurried away from her
and a laughing Martin, and as he dashed past Lyam,
shouted, 'With Your Majesty's permission.'
Lyam's expression ran quickly from surprise to mirth,
while Caldric and the other courtiers 'were amazed at the
Prince of Krondor's behaviour. Lyam leaned close to
caldric and said, 'Anita.'
Caldric's old face beamed with a sunny smile as he
chuckled in understanding. 'Then you'll soon be off again,
this time for Krondor and your brother's wedding?'
"We'd sooner hold it here, but tradition dictates the
Prince weds in his own city, and we must bow before
tradition. But that won't be for a few weeks yet. These
things take time, and we have a kingdom to govern in the
meantime, though it seems you've done well enough in
our absence.'
"Perhaps, Your Majesty, but now that there is a King
again in Rillanon, many matters held in abeyance this
past year will be unloosed for your consideration. Those
petitions and other documents forwarded to you during
your travels were but a tenth part of what you will see.'
Lyam gave a mock groan. 'We think we shall have the
captain put to sea again at once.'
Caldric smiled. "Come, Majesty. Your city wishes to
see its King.'

The eastern garden was empty save for one figure. She
moved quietly between well-tended planters of flowers
not quite ready to send forth blooms. A few heartier
varieties were already beginning to take on the bright
green of spring and many of the bordering hedges were
evergreen, but the garden still seemed more the barren
symbol of winter than the fresh promise of spring, which
would manifest itself within a few weeks.
Anita looked across the vista of Rillanon below. The
palace sat atop a hill, once the site of a large keep that still
served as its heart. Seven high-arched bridges spanned the
river that surrounded the palace with the loops of its
meandering course. The afternoon wind was chill, and
Anita drew a shawl of fine silken material close about her
shoulders. Anita smiled in remembrance. Her green eyes misted
over slightly as she thought of her late father, Prince
Erland, and of all that had occurred in the last year and
more: how Guy du Bas-Tyra had arrived in Krondor and
attempted to force her into a marriage of state, and how
Arutha had come to Krondor incognito. They had hidden
together under the protection of the Mockers - the thieves
of Krondor - for over a month until their escape to
Crydee. At the end of the Riftwar she had travelled to
Rillanon to see Lyam crowned. During all those months
she had also fallen deeply in love with the King's  younger
brother. And now Arutha was returning' to Rillanon.
The tread of boots upon flagstone caused her to turn.
Anita expected to see a servant or guard, come to tell of
the King's arrival in the harbour. Instead a weary-looking
man in fine but rumpled traveller's 'clothing approached
across the garden. His dark brown hair was tousled by
the breeze and his brown eyes were ringed with dark
circles. His near-gaunt face was set in the half-frown
which he assumed when he was dwelling upon something
serious, and which she found so dear. As he neared, she
silently marvelled at the way he walked, lithe, almost
catlike in his quickness and economy of movement. As
he came up to her, he smiled, tentatively, even shyly
Before she could muster years of court-taught poise,
Anita found tears coming to her eyes. Suddenly she was
in his arms, clinging tightly to him. 'Arutha' was all she
said.
For a time they stood saying nothing, holding each
other tight. Then he slowly tilted her head back and
kissed her. Without words he spoke of his devotion and
longing and without words she answered. He looked
down at eyes as green as the sea and a nose delightfully
dusted by a small scattering of freckles, a pleasing imperfection
upon her otherwise fair skin. With a tired grin he
said, "I've returned.'
Then he was laughing at the obvious remark. She
laughed as well. He felt buoyant to be holding this slender
young woman in his arms, smelling the faint scent of her
dark red ,hair, which was caught up in some complex
fashion popular at court this season. He rejoiced to be
with her again.
She stepped away but held tightly to his hand. "it has
been so very long,' she said softly. 'it was only to be for a
month . . . then another, then more. You've been gone
over half a year. I couldn't bring myself to go to the
dock. I knew I'd cry at sight of you.' Her cheeks were
wet from tears. She smiled and wiped them away.
Arutha squeezed her hand. "Lyam kept finding more
nobles to visit. The business of the Kingdom,' he said
with a wry note of deprecation. From the day he had met
Anita, Arutha had been unable to articulate his feelings
for the girl. Strongly attracted to her from the first, he
had wrestled with his emotions constantly after their
escape from Krondor. He was powerfully drawn to her
and yet saw her as little more than a child, only about to
come of age. But she had been a calming influence on
him, reading his moods like no one else, sensing how to
ease his worry, stem his anger, and draw him from his
dark introspection. And he had come to love her soft
ways. He had remained silent until the night before he had
departed with Lyam. They had walked in this garden,
speaking late into the night, and while little of consequence
had been said, Arutha had left feeling as if an
understanding had been reached. The light, and occasionally
somewhat formal, tone of her letters had caused him
worry, fear that he had misread her that night, but now,
looking down at her, he knew he had not. Without
preamble he said, "I have done little but think of you
since we left.' He saw tears come again to her eyes, and she said,
'And I of you.
'I love you, Anita. I would have you always at my side.
Will you consent to marry me?'
She squeezed his hand as she said, "Yes,' then embraced
him again. Arutha's mind reeled under the sheer weight
of happiness he felt. Holding her close, he whispered.
'You are my joy. You are my heart.')
They stood there for a time, the tall, rangy Prince and
the slender Princess, whose head barely reached his chin.
They spoke softly and nothing seemed of importance
except the other's presence. Then the self-conscious
sound of someone clearing his throat brought them both
out of their reverie. They turned to find a palace guardsman
standing at the entrance to the garden. He said,
'His Majesty approaches, Your Highnesses. he will be
entering the great hall within a few minutes.'
Arutha said, 'We shall go there at once.' He led Anita
by the hand past the guard, who fell in behind them. Had
they looked back, they would have seen a palace guardsman fighting hard
to overcome a broad grin.

Arutha gave Anita's hand a final squeeze, then stationed
himself next to the door as Lyam entered the grand
throne room of the palace. As the King moved towards
the dais upon which his throne rested, courtiers bowed to
him, and the Court Master of Ceremonies struck the
floor with the iron-shod butt of his ceremonial staff. A
herald shouted, 'Hearken to me, hearken to me! Let the
word go forth: Lyam, first of that name and by the grace
of the gods rightwise ruler, is returned to us and again
sits upon his throne. Long live the King.'
"Long live the King.' came the response of those
gathered in the great hall.
When he was seated, his simple gold circlet of office
upon his brow and his purple mantle' upon his shoulders,
Lyam said, "We are pleased to be home.'
The Master of Ceremonies struck the floor again and
the herald shouted out Arutha's name. Arutha entered
the hall, Carline and Anita behind him, and Martin
behind them, as protocol dictated. Each was announced
in order. When all were in place at Lyam's side, the King
motioned to Arutha.
Arutha' came to his side and leaned over. 'Did you ask
her?' said the king.
With a lopsided smile Arutha responded, 'Ask her
what?'
Lyam grinned. 'To marry, jackanapes. Of course you
did, and from that sloppy smile, she said yes,' he whispered. '
Go get back in place and I'll make the announcement
in a moment.' Arutha went back to Anita's side
and Lyam motioned Duke Caldric over. 'We are weary
my lord Chancellor. We would be pleased to keep the
day's business brief. '
"There are two matters I judge require Your Majesty's
attention this day. The balance may wait.'
Lyam indicated that Caldric should proceed. 'First,
from the Border Barons and Duke Vandros of Yabon,
we have reports of unusual goblin activity in the Western
Realm.
Arutha's attention was drawn from Anita at this. The
Western Realm was his to govern. Lyam looked over
towards him, then Martin, indicating they should attend.
martin said, 'What of Crydee, my lord?'
Caldric said, 'No word from the Far Coast, Your
Grace. At this time we've only reports from the area
between Highcastle to the east and the Lake of the Sky
 to the west - steady sightings of goblin bands moving
northward, and occasional raids as they pass villages.
'Northwards' martin glanced at Arutha.
Arutha said, 'With Your Majesty's permission?' Lyam
nodded. 'Martin, do you think the goblins move to join
the Brotherhood of the Dark Path?'
Martin considered. 'I would not dismiss such a possibility.
The goblins have long served the moredhel.
Though I would have thought it more likely the Dark
Brothers would be moving south, returning to their homes
in the Grey Tower Mountains.' The dark cousins to the
elves had been driven northward from the Grey Towers
by the Tsurani invasion during the Riftwar. Martin said
to Caldric, 'My lord, have there been reportings of the
Dark Brotherhood?'
Caldric shook his head. 'There have been the usual
sightings along the foothills of the Teeth of the World,
Duke Martin, but nothing extraordinary. Lords Northwarden,
Ironpass, and Highcastle send their usual reports,
nothing more, regarding the Brotherhood.'
Lyam said, 'Arutha, we shall leave it to you and Martin
to review these reports and determine what may be
required in the West.' He looked at Caldric. "What else,
my lord?"
'A message from the Empress of Great Kesh, Your
Majesty.'
'And what has Kesh to say to Isles?'
"The Empress has ordered her ambassador, one Abdur
Rachman Memo Hazara-Khan, to Isles for the purpose of
discussing ending whatever contention may exist between
Kesh and Isles.'
Lyam said, "That news pleases us, my lord. Overlong
has the issue of the Vale of Dreams prevented our
Kingdom and Great Kesh from treating fairly with one
another in other matters. It would prove doubly beneficial
to our two nations if we could settle this matter for all
time.' Lyam stood. 'But send word that His Excellency
will have to attend us in Krondor, for we have a wedding
to celebrate.
'My lords and ladies of the court, it is with profound
pleasure that we announce the forthcoming wedding of
our brother Arutha to the Princess Anita.' The King
turned to Arutha and Anita, taking them each by the
hand and presenting them to the assembled court, who
applauded the announcement.
From where she stood next to her brothers, Carline
threw Laurie a dark frown, and went to kiss Anita's
cheek. While good cheer reigned in the hall, Lyam said,
'This day's business is at an end.'

2

Krondor

The city slumbered.
A mantle of heavy fog had rolled in off the Bitter Sea,
enshrouding Krondor in dense whiteness. The capital of
the Western Realm of the Kingdom never rested, but
normal night sounds were muffled by the nearly impenetrable
haze cloaking the movements of those still travelling
the streets. Everything seemed more subdued, less
Strident than usual, almost as if the city were at peace
with itself.
For one inhabitant of the city the night's ç conditions
were nearly ideal. The fog had turned every street into a
narrow, dark passageway, each block of buildings into
an isolated island. The unending gloom was punctuated
slightly by streetlamps at the corners, small way stations
of warmth and brightness for passersby before they once
more plunged into the damp and murky night. But
between those small havens of illumination one given to
working in darkness was granted additional protection, as
small noises were deadened and movements were masked
from chance observation. Jimmy the Hand went about
his business.
About fifteen years of age, Jimmy was already counted
among the most gifted members of the Mockers, the
Guild of Thieves. Jimmy had been a thief nearly all his
short life, a street boy who had graduated from stealing
fruit from peddlers' carts to full membership in the
Mockers. Jimmy's father was unknown to him, and his
mother had been a prostitute in the Poor Quarter until
her death at the hands of a drunken sailor. Since then the
boy had been a Mocker, and his rise had been rapid. The
most astonishing thing about Jimmy's rise was not his
age, for the Mockers were of the opinion that as soon as
a boy was ready to try thieving, he should be turned
loose. Failure had its own rewards. A poor thief was
quickly a dead thief. As long as another Mocker was not
put at risk, there was little loss in the death of a thief of
limited talents. No, the most astonishing fact of Jimmy's
rapid rise was that he was nearly as good as he thought
he was. With stealth bordering on the preternatural he moved
about the room. The night's quiet was broken only by the
deep snores of his unsuspecting host and hostess. The
faint glow from a distant street-lamp, entering the open
window, was his only illumination. Jimmy peered around,
his other senses aiding his search. A sudden change in
the sound of the floorboards under Jimmy's light tread,
and the thief found what he was looking for. he laughed
inwardly at the merchant's lack of originality in hoarding
his wealth. With economical movement the boy thief had
the false floorboard up and his hand into Trig the Fuller's
hideaway.
Trig snorted and rolled over, bringing a responding
snore from his fat wife. Jimmy froze in place, barely
breathing, until the two sleeping figures were quiescent
for several minutes. He then extracted a heavy pouch
and gently placed the booty in his tunic, secured by his
wide belt. He put the board back and returned to the
window. With luck it might be days before the theft was
discovered.
He stepped through the window and, turning backwards,
reached up to grip the eaves. A quick pull, and he
was sitting on the roof. Overhanging the edge, he closed
the window shutters with a gentle push and jiggled the
hook and twine so the inside latch fell back into place.
He quickly retrieved his twine, silently laughing at the
perplexity sure to result when the fuller tried to figure
out how the gold had been taken. Jimmy lay quietly for a
moment, listening for sounds of waking inside. When
none came, he relaxed.
He rose and began making his way along the Thieves'
highway, as the rooftops of the city were known. He
leaped from the roof of Trig's house to the next, then sat
down upon the tiles to inspect his haul. The pouch was
evidence the Fuller had been a thrifty man, holding back
a fair share of his steady profits. It would keep Jimmy in
comfert for months if he didn't gamble it all away.

A slight noise caused Jimmy to' drop to the roof, hugging the tiles in
silence. He heard another sound, a scuffle of movement coming from the
other side of a gable halfway down the roof from where he lay. The boy
cursed his luck and ran a hand through his fog-damp curly brown hair. For
another to be upon the rooftops nearby could only spell trouble. Jimmy was
working without writ from the Nightmaster of Mockers, a habit of his that
had earned him reprimands and beatings the few times he had been found out,
but if he was now jeopardizing another mocker's nightwork, he was in line
for more than harsh words or a cuffing around the room. Jimmy was treated
as an adult by others in the guild, his position hard won by skill and wit.
In turn he was expected to be a responsible member, his age being of no
account. By his risking the life of another Mocker, his own could be
forfeit. The other alternative could prove as bad. If a freebooting thief
was working the city without permission from the Mockers, it was Jimmy's
duty to identify and report him. That would somewhat mitigate Jimmy's own
breach of Mocker etiquette, especially if he gave the guild its normal two
thirds of the fuller's gold. Jimmy slipped over the ç peak of the roof and
crawled along until he was opposite the source of the noise. He need only
glimpse the independent thief and report him. The Nightmaster would
circulate the man's description and sooner or later he would be paid a
visit by some guild bashers who would educate him in the proper courtesies
due the Mockers by visiting thieves'. Jimmy edged upwards and' peered over
the rooftop. He saw nothing. Looking about, he glimpsed a faint movement
from the corner of his eye and turned. Again he saw nothing. Jimmy the Hand
settled down to wait. There was something here that provoked his sensitive
curiosity. That acute curiosity was one of Jimmy's only weaknesses when it
came to work - that and an occasional irritation with the need to divide
his loot with the guild, which took a dim view of this reluctance. His
upbringing

by the Mockers had given him an appreciation of life - a scepticism
bordering on cynicism - far beyond his years. He was uneducated but canny.
One thing he knew: sound does not issue from thin air - except when magic
is in Play.
Jimmy settled down a moment to puzzle out what he
didn't see before him. Either some invisible spirit was
squirming about uncomfortably on the roof tiles, which
while possible was highly unlikely, or something more
corporeal was hidden deep within the shadows of the
other side of the gable.
Jimmy crawled along until he was opposite the gable
and raised himself slightly to look over the peak of the
roof. He peered into the darkness and when he heard
another faint scuffling was rewarded with a glimpse of
movement. Someone was deep within the gloom, wearing
a dark cloak. Jimmy could locate him only when he
moved. Jimmy inched along below the peak to gain a
better angle to watch, until he was directly behind the
figure. Again he reared up. The lurker moved, adjusting
his cloak around his shoulders. The hair on the back of
Jihmmy's neck stood up. The figure before him was dressed
all in black and carried a heavy crossbow. This was no
thief but a Nighthawk!
Jimmy lay rock still. To stumble across a member of
the Guild of Death at work was not likely to enhance
one's prospects of old age. But there was a standing order
among the Mockers that any news of the brotherhood of
assassins was to be reported at once, and the order had
come down from the Upright Man himself, the highest
authority in the Mockers. Jimmy chose to wait, trusting
in his skills should he be discovered. He might not possess
the nearly legendary attributes of a Nighthawk, but he
had the supreme confidence of a fifteen-year-old boy who
had become the youngest Master Thief in the history of
the Mockers. If he was discovered, it would not be his
first chase across the Thieves' Highway.
Time passed and Jimmy waited, with a discipline
unusual for one his age. A thief who cannot remain still
for hours if needs be does not remain a living thief long.
Occasionally Jimmy heard and glimpsed the assassin
moving about. Jimmy's awe of the legendary Nighthawks
steadily lessened, for this one displayed little skill in
staying motionless. Jimmy had long before mastered the
trick of quietly tensing and relaxing muscles to prevent
cramping and stiffening. Then, he considered, most
legends tend to be overstated, and in the Nighthawks'
line of work it was only to their advantage to keep people
in awe of them.
Abruptly the assassin moved, letting his cloak fall away
completely as he raised his crossbow. Jimmy could hear
hoofbeats approaching. Riders passed below, and the
assassin slowly lowered the weapon. Obviously those
below had not included his intended' prey.
Jimmy' elbowed himself a little higher to gain a better
view of the man, now that his cloak didn't mask him. The
assassin turned slightly, retrieving his cloak, exposing his
face to Jimmy. The thief gathered his legs under him,
ready to spring away should the need arise, and studied
the man. Jimmy could make out little, except that the
man had dark hair and was light-complexioned. Then the
assassin seemed to be looking directly at the boy.
Jimmy's heart pounded loudly in his ears and he
wondered how the assassin could fail to hear such a
racket. But the man turned back to his vigil, and Jimmy
dropped silently below the roof peak. He breathed slowly,
fighting back a sudden giddy urge to giggle. After it
passed, he relaxed slightly and chanced another look.
Again the assassin waited. Jimmy settled in. He wondered
at the Nighthawk's weapon. The heavy crossbow
was a poor choice for a marksman, being less accurate
than any good bow. It would do for someone with little
training, for it delivered a bolt with thundering force - a
wound less than fatal from an arrow could kill if from a
bolt, because of the added shock of the blow. Jimmy had
.once seen a steel cuirass on display in a tavern. The
metal breastplate had a hole in it the size of Jimmy's fist,
punched through by a bolt from a heavy crossbow. It had
been hung up not because of the size of the hole, which
was usual for the weapon, but because .the wearer had
somehow survived. But the weapon had its disadvantages.
Besides being inaccurate past a dozen yards, it had a
short range.
Jimmy craned his neck to watch the Nighthawk and
felt a tic in his right arm. He shifted his weight slightly to
his left. Suddenly a tile gave way beneath his hand and
with a loud crack it broke. It fell away, clattering over
the roof to crash down on the cobbles below. To Jimmy
it was a thunder peal sounding his doom.
Moving with inhuman speed, the assassin turned and
' fired. Jimmy's slipping saved his life, for he could not
have dodged fast enough to avoid the bolt, but gravity
had provided the necessary speed. He struck the roof and
heard the quarrel pass over his head. For a brief instant
he imagined his head exploding like a ripe pumpkin and
silently thanked Banath, patron god of thieves.
Jimmy's reflexes saved him next, for rather than standing,
he rolled to his right'. Where he had lain a moment
before, a sword came crashing down. Knowing he
couldn't gain enough of a lead to outrun the ' assassin,
Jimmy leapt up into a crouch, pulling his dirk from his
. right boot top in a single motion. He had little love for
fighting, but he had realized early in his career that his
life might depend upon his use of the blade. He had
practised diligently whenever the opportunity had presented
itself. Jimmy only wished his rooftop foray had
not precluded his bringing along his rapier.
The assassin turned to face the boy, and Jimmy saw
him teeter for a brief instant. The Nighthawk might have
quick reflexes, but he was not used to the precarious
footing the rooftops offered. Jimmy grinned, as much to
hide his fear as from any amusement at the assassin's unease.
In a hissing whisper the assassin said, "Pray to whatever
gods brought you here, boy.' Jimmy thought such a remark odd, ç
considering it distracted
only the speaker. The assassin lashed out, the
blade slicing the air where Jimmy had been, and the boy
thief was off.
He dashed along the roof and leapt back to the building
wherein lived Trig the Fuller. A moment later he could
hear the assassin landing also. Jimmy ran nimbly until he
was confronted by a yawning gap. In his hurry he had
forgotten there was a wide alley at this end of the building
and the next building was impossibly distant. He spun
about . The assassin was slowly approaching, his sword point
levelled at Jimmy. Jimmy was struck by a thought and
suddenly began a mad stomping dance upon the roof. In
a moment the noise was answered by an angry voice from
below. 'Thief! I am undone!' Jimmy could picture Trig
the Fuller leaning out of his window, rousing the city
watch, and hoped the assassin had the same picture in
mind. The racket below would surely have the building
surrounded in short order. He prayed the assassin would
flee rather than punish the author of his failure.
The assassin ignored the fuller's cries and advanced
upon Jimmy. Again he slashed and Jimmy ducked, bringing
himself inside the assassin's reach. Jimmy stabbed
with his dirk and felt the point dig into the Nighthawk's
sword arm. The assassin's blade went clattering to the
street below. A howl of pain echoed through the night,
silencing the fuller's shouts. Jimmy heard the shutters
shut over his head.
The assassin dodged another thrust by Jimmy and
pulled a dagger from his belt. He advanced again, not
speaking, his weapon held in his left hand. Jimmy heard
shouts from the street below and resisted the urge to
cry for aid. He felt little confidence about besting the
Nighthawk, even if the assassin was fighting with his off
hand, but he was also reluctant to explain his presence
upon the fuller's roof. Besides, even should he shout for
aid, by the time the watch arrived, gained entrance to the
house, and reached the roof the issue would be decided.
Jimmy backed to the end of the roof, until his heels
hung in space. The assassin closed, saying, 'You have
nowhere left to run, boy.'
Jimmy waited, preparing a desperate gamble. The
assassin tensed, the sign Jimmy had watched for. Jimmy
crouched and stepped backwards all at once, letting
himself fall. The assassin had begun a lunge, and when
his blade did not meet the expected resistance, he overbalanced
and fell forward. Jimmy caught the edge of the
roof, nearly dislocating his shoulder sockets with the jolt.
He felt more than saw the assassin fall past, silently
speeding through the darkness to crash on the cobbles
below.
Jimmy hung for a moment, his hands, arms, and
shoulders afire with pain. It would be so simple just to let
,go and fall into soft darkness. Shaking off the fatigue and
pain, he urged protesting muscles to pull himself back
onto the roof. He lay gasping for a moment, then rolled
over and looked down.
The assassin lay still on the cobbles, his crooked neck
clear evidence he was no longer alive. Jimmy ç
breathed deeply, the chill of fear finally acknowledged.
He suppressed a shudder and ducked down as two men
rushed into the alley below. They grabbed the corpse and
rolled it over, then picked it up and hurried off. Jimmy
considered. For the assassin to have confederates about
was a certain sign this had been
a Guild of Death undertaking.
But who was expected down this street at this hour of the night? Casting
about for a moment, he
weighed the risk of staying a little longer to satisfy his
curiosity against the certain arrival of the city watch
within a few more minutes. Curiosity won. The sound of hoofbeats ç
echoed through the fog, and
soon two riders came into the light that burned from the
lantern before Trig's home. It was at this moment that
Trig decided to open his shutters again and resume his
hue and cry. Jimmy's eyes widened as the riders looked
up towards the fuller's window. Jimmy had not seen one
of the men in over a year, but he was well known to the
thief. Shaking his head at the implications of what he
saw, the boy thief judged it a good time to depart. But
seeing that man below made it impossible for Jimmy to
consider this night's business at an end. It would most
likely be a long night. He rose and began his trek along
the Thieves' Highway, back towards Mockers' Rest.

Arutha reined in his horse and looked up to where a man
in a nightshirt shouted from a window. 'Laurie, what is
that all about?' 'From what I can make out between the wails and
screams, I judge that burgher to have recently been the
victim of some felony.'
Arutha laughed. 'I guessed that much çmyself.'
He did not know Laurie well, but he enjoyed the singer's wit and
sense of fun. He knew there was now some trouble
between Laurie and Carline, which was why Laurie had
asked to accompany Arutha on his journey to Krondor.
Carline would be arriving in a week with Anita and
Lyam. But Arutha had long ago decided that what Carlline
didn't confide in him wasn't his business. Besides, Arutha
was sympathetic to Laurie's plight if he had fallen into
her bad graces. After Anita, Carline was the last person
Arutha would wish angry with him.
Arutha studied the area as a few sleepy souls in
neighbouring buildings began shouting inquiries. 'Well,
there's bound to be some investigation here soon. We'd
best be along.'
As if his words had been prophecy, Arutha and Laurie
were startled to hear a voice coming out of the fog. 'Here now!'
emerging from the murk were three men wearing
the grey felt caps and yellow tabards of the city watch. ç
The leftmost watchman, a beefy, heavy-browed fellow,
carried a lantern in one hand and a large nightstick in the
other. The centre man was of advancing years, close to
retirement age from appearances, and the third was a
young lad, but both had an air of street experience about
'them, evidenced in the way they casually had their hands
resting on large belt knives. 'What passes this night?' the older ç
watchman said, his voice a mixture of good-natured
humour and authority.
"Some disturbance in that house, watchman.' Arutha
pointed towards the fuller. 'We were simply passing by.'
'Were you now, sir? Well, I don't suppose you'd object
to remaining for a few moments longer until we discover
what' this is all about.' He signalled to the young watchman
to look around.
.Arutha nodded, saying nothing. At that point a red
puffball of a man emerged from the house,. waving
his arms while he shouted, 'Thieves! they stole into my
my very room, and took my treasure! What's to be
done when a law-abiding citizen isn't safe in his bed, his , ç
own bed, I ask you?' Catching sight of Arutha and
laurie, he said, "Are these then the thieves, the vicious
theives?' Mustering what dignity he could while wearing
. a voluminous nightshirt, he exclaimed, 'What have you
done with my gold, my precious gold?'
The beefy watchman jerked on the shouting man's
arm, nearly spinning the fuller completely around. 'Here
now, watch your shouting, churl.'
.Churl!' shouted Trig. 'Just what, I ask, gives you the
right to call a citizen, a law-abiding citizen, a - ' He
stopped, and his expression changed to one of disbelief
as a company of riders appeared out of the fog. At their
head rode a tall, black-skinned man wearing the tabard
of the captain of the Prince's Royal Household Guard.
Seeing the gathering in the streets, he signalled for his
men to rein in. With a shake of his head, Arutha said to Laurie, ç
'So much for a quiet return to Krondor.'
The captain said, 'Watchman, what is all this?'
The watchman saluted. "That is what I was just undertaking
to discover this very minute, Captain. We appre-
hended these two . . .' He indicated Arutha and Laurie.
The captain rode closer and laughed. The watchman
looked sideways at this tall captain, not knowing what to
say. Riding up to Arutha, Gardan, former sergeant of
the garison at Crydee, saluted. "Welcome to your city,
Highness.' At these 'words the other guards braced in
their saddles, saluting their Prince.
Arutha returned the salute of the guardsmen, then
shook hands with Gardan while the watchmen and the
fuller stood speechless. "Singer,' said Gardan, 'it is good
to see you again, as well.' Laurie acknowledged the
greeting with a smile and wave. He had known Gardan
for only a brief while before Arutha had dispatched him
to Krondor to assume command of the city and palace
guards, but he liked the grey-haired soldier.
Arutha looked to where the watchmen and the fuller
waited. The watchmen had their caps off and the seniormost
said, 'Beggin' Your Highness's pardon, old Bert
didn't know. Any offence was unintended, Sire.'
Arutha shook his head, amused despite the late hour
and the cold weather. "No offence, Bert the Watchman.
You were but doing your duty, and rightly so.' He turned
to Gardan. 'Now, how in heaven's name did you manage
to find me?'
'Duke Caldric sent a full itinerary along with the news
that you were returning from Rillanon. You were due in
tomorrow, but I said to Earl Volney you'd most likely try
to slip in tonight. As you were riding from Salador, there
was only one gate you'd enter' - he pointed down the
street towards the eastern gate, unseen in the fogshrouded
night - 'and here we are. Your Highness arrived
even earlier than I had expected. Where is the rest of
your party?'
"Half the guards are escorting the Princess Anita
towards her mother's estates. The rest are camped about
six hours ride from the city. I couldn't abide one more
night on the road. Besides, there's a great deal to be
done.' Gardan looked quizzically at the Prince, but all
Arutha would say was "More when I speak to Volney.
Now' he looked at the fuller - 'who is this loud fellow?' "This ç
is Trig the Fuller, Highness,' answered the senior
watchman. 'He claims someone broke into his house and
stole from him. He says he was awakened by the sounds
of struggle on his roof. '
Trig interrupted. 'They were fighting over my head,
over' my . . . very . . . head . . .' His voice trailed off as
he realized who he was speaking to. '. . . Your Highness,'
he finished, suddenly embarrassed.
The heavy-browed watchman threw him a stern look
'He says he heard some sort of scream and, like a turtle
pulled his head back in from the window.'
Trig nodded vigorously. "Like someone was doing
murder, doing bloody murder, Your Highness. It was
horrible.' The beefy watchman visited Trig with an elbow
'to the ribs at the interruption.
The young watchman came from the side alley. "This
was long atoP some rubbish on the street the other side of
the house, Bert.' He held out ç
the assassin's sword.
"There was some blood on the grip, but none on the
blade. There's also a small pool of blood in the alley, but
no body, anywhere.' Arutha motioned for Gardan to take the sword. ç
The young watchman, observing the guards and the obvious
position of command assumed by the newcomers, handed
up the sword, then doffed his own cap.
Arutha received the sword çfrom Gardan, saw nothing
significant in it, and returned it to the watchman. 'Turn
your guards around, Gardan. It is late and there's little
sleep left this night.'
'But what of the theft?' cried the fuller, çshaken loose
from his silence. 'it was my savings, my life savings. I'm
ruined. What shall I do?' The Prince turned his horse and came ç
alongside the watchmen.
To Trig he said, "I offer my sympathies, good
fuller, but rest assured the watch will do their utmost to
retrieve your goods.'
"Now,' said Bert to Trig,) 'I suggest you çturn in for
what's left of the night, sir. In the morning you may enter
a complaint with the duty sergeant of the watch. He'll
want a description of what was taken.
.What was taken? Gold, man, çthat's what they took!
My hoard, my entire hoard.'
"Gold, is it? Then,' said Bert, with ç
the voice of experience, "
I suggest you turn in and tomorrow begin to rebuild
your treasure, for as sure as there's fog in Krondor, you'll
not see one coin again. But do not be too disconsolate,
good sir. You are a man of means, and gold quickly
comes to those of your station, resources, and
enterprise." Arutha stifled a laugh, for despite the man's personal
tragedy, he stood a comic figure in his nightshirt of linen
his nightcap tipping forward to almost touch his nose
'Good fuller, I will make amends.' He pulled his dagger
from his belt and handed it down to Bert the watchman.
'This weapon bears my family crest. The only others like
it are worn by my brothers, the King and the Duke of
Crydee. Return it to the palace tomorrow and a bag of
gold will be placed in its stead. I'll have no unhappy
fulers in Krondor on the day of my homecoming. Now I
bid you all good night.' Arutha spurred his horse and led
his companions towards the palace.
When Arutha and his guards had vanished into the
'room, Bert turned to Trig. 'Well then, sir, there's a
happy end to it,' he said, passing the Prince's dagger over
to the fuller. "And you may take some added pleasure in
knowing you are one of the few of common birth who
may claim to have spoken with the Prince of Krondor,
albeit under somewhat strange and difficult circumstances.'
To his men he said, 'Let us back to our rounds.
There'll be more than this one little bit of fun in Krondor
on a night like this.' He signalled for his men to follow
and led them off into the white murk.
"" Trig stood alone. After a moment his expression brightened
and he shouted up to his wife and any others who
'. looked out of their windows, 'i've spoken to the
'prince. I, Trig the Fuller!' Feeling emotions somewhat
akin to elation, the fuller trudged back into the warmth
of his home, clutching Arutha's dagger.

Jimmy made his way through the narrowest of tunnels.
the passage was part of the maze of sewers and other
underground constructions common to that part of the
city, and every foot of those underground passages was
patrolled by the Mockers. Jimmy passed a tofsman -
who made his living gathering up whatever of use
he found in the sewers. He used a stick to halt a
floating mass of debris carried along on the waters of the sewer.
the floating mass was  called a tof, that which tofleets, in
a corruption of language. He picked at it, looking for
a coin or anything else of value. He was in fact a sentry.
Jimmy signalled to him, ducked under a low-hanging
timber, apparently a fallen brace in an abandoned cellar,
and entered a large hall carved out among the tunnels.
Here was the heart of the guild of thieves, Mockers'
rest. Jimmy retrieved his rapier from the weapons locker.
He sought out a quiet corner in which to sit, for he felt
troubled by the conflict he faced. By rights he should
own up to his unauthorized pilfering of the fuller's house,
split the gold, and take whatever punishment the Nightmaster
meted out. By tomorrow afternoon the guild
would know the fuller had been boosted, anyway. Once
it was clear that no frEebooting thief was at work,
suspicion would fall upon Jimmy and the others known to
occasionally go for a night's foray without leave. Any
punishment forthcoming then would be doubly harsh
for his not having confessed now. Still, Jimmy couldn't
consider only his own interests, since he knew the
assassin's target had been none other than the Prince of
Krondor himself. And Jimmy had spent enough time with
Arutha when the Mockers had hidden the Prince and
Princess Anita from du Bas-Tyra's men to have developed
a liking for the Prince. Arutha had given Jimmy the very
rapier the boy thief wore at his side. No, Jimmy couldn't
ignore the assassin's presence, but he was not clear where
his best course lay. After long moments of quiet consideration, Jimmy
decided. He would first attempt to get warning to the
Prince , then pass along the information about the assassin
to Alvarny the Quick, the Daymaster. Alvarny was a friend and ç
allowed Jimmy a little more latitude than
Gaspar daVey, the Nightmaster. Alvarny would make no
mention to the Upright man of Jimmy's tardiness in
reporting, if the boy didn't take too long to come forth.
Which meant Jimmy would have to reach Arutha quickly,
then return at once to speak with the Daymaster - before
sundown tomorrow at the latest. Any later than that, and
Jimmy would be compromised beyond even Alvarny's
ability to look the other way. Alvarny might be a generous
man, now that he was in his twilight, but he was still a
Mocker. Disloyalty to the guild was something he would
not permit.
"Jimmy!'

Jimmy looked up and saw Golden Base approaching.
While young, the dashing thief was already experienced
in parting rich older women from their wealth. He relied
more on his blond good looks and charm than on stealth.
baSe made a display of the valuable clothing he wore.
"What think you?'
Jimmy nodded in approval. "Taken to robbing tailors?'
"' Golden aimed a playful, halfhearted cuff at Jimmy,
who ducked easily, then sat next to the boy. 'No, you
misbegotten son of an alley cat, I have not. My current
"benefactor" is the widow of the famous Masterbrewer
fallon." Jimmy had heard of the man, his ales and beers
had been so  highly prized they had even graced the table
of the  late Prince Erland. 'And given her late husband's
and now her far-reaching business concerns, she has
recieved an invitation to the reception.'
"Reception?' Jimmy knew that Golden had some tidbit ofç
gossip he wished to unfold in his own good time.
"Ah,' ~' said Golden, 'did I fail to mention the fact of a
wedding?"
Jimmy rolled his eyes upwards but played along. 'What
wedding, Golden?'
"Why, The royal wedding of course. Though we shall be
seated away from the King's table, it will not be at the
most remote."
Jimmy sat bolt upright. "The King? In Krondor!'
"Of course."
Jimmy griPpEd Golden by the arm. "Start at the
beginning. Grinning, the handsome but not terribly perceptive
confidence man said, "The widow Fallen was informed by
no' less a source than the purchasing agent at the palace,
a man she has known for seventeen years, that extra
stores were required .within a month's time for, "and I
quote, "the royal wedding" One is safe in assuming a
king would be in attendance at his own wedding.
Jimmy shook his head. 'No, you simpleton, not the
King's. Anita and Arutha's '
Golden seemed ready to take umbrage at the remark,
but then a sudden glimmer of interest showed in his eyes.
"What makes you say that?'
"The King weds in Rillanon. The Prince çweds in
Krondor.' Golden nodded, indicating this made sense. "I
hid out with Anita and Arutha, it was only a matter of
time before they wed. That's why he's back.'
Seeing a reaction at that, Jimmy quickly added, '
Or will be back soon. Jimmy's mind raced. Not only would Lyam be In
Krondor for the wedding, but so would every noble of
importance in the West, and no small number from the
East. And if Base knew of the wedding, then half of
Krondor did as well and the other half would know of it
before the next sundown.
Jimmy's reveriE was interrupted by the çapproach of
Laughing Jack, the Nightwarden, senior lieutenant to the
Nightmaster. The thin-lipped man came to stand before
Jimmy and Base and, with hands upon hips, said, 'You
look like you've something on your mind, boy?'
Jimmy had no affection for Jack. He was a dour, tightjawed
man given to violent tempers and unnecessary
cruelty. The only reason for his high place' in the guild
was his ability at keeping the guild's bashers and other
hotheads in line. Jimmy's dislike was returned in kind by
Jack, for it had been Jimmy who had appended 'Laughing'
to Jack's name. In the years Jack had been in the guild,
no one could remember hearing him laugh. 'Nothing,
really,"  said Jimmy.
Jack's eyes narrowed as he studied Jimmy, then Base,
'for a long minute. 'I hear there was some fuss over near ç
the east gate, you weren't thereabouts this night, were you?"
Jimmy maintained an indifferent- expression and
so did  Base, as Jack had asked both the question.
' Golden shook his head in the negative. Jimmy wondered
if Jack  already knew about the Nighthawk. if he did, and
someone else had caught sight of Jimmy nearby, Jimmy
could expect  no mercy from Jack's bashers. Still, Jimmy
suspected that if Jack had proof, he would have come
accusing, not questioning. Subtlety was not Jack's hallmark.
Jimmy feigned indifference as he said, "Another
drunken argument? No, I was asleep most of the night.'
Good, then you'll be fresh,' said Jack. With a jerk of
his head he indicated Base should absent himself. Golden
rose  and left without comment and Jack placed his boot
on the bench next to Jimmy. 'We've got a job this
night."
"Tonight?' said Jimmy' , already counting the çnight half
over. There were barely five hours left until sunrise.
"It's special, from himself."  he said, meaning the
upright Man. 'There's a royal do on at the palace and
The Keshian ambassador's coming. A load of gifts arrived.
late tonight, gifts for a wedding. They'll be straight off
for the palace by midday next at latest, so tonight's our
only chance to boost them; It's a rare chance.' His tone
left no doubt in Jimmy's mind that his presence was not
requested but required. Jimmy had hoped to get some
sleep tonight before heading for the palace, but now
there was no chance of that. With a note of resignation in
his voice he said, 'When and where?'
"An hour from now at the big warehouse one street
over from the Fiddler Crab Inn, near dockside.'
Jimmy knew the place. He nodded and without another
word left Laughing Jack. He headed up the stairs towards
the street. The question of assassins and plots would have
to wait a few hours more.

Fog still overwhelmed Krondor. The warehouse district
near the docks was usually quiet in the early morning
hours, but this night the scene was otherworldly. Jimmy
wended his way among large bales of goods, of too little
value to warrant the additional expense of storage inside,
and therefore safe from the threat of thievery. Bulk
cotton, animal fodder to be shipped, and stacked lumber
created a maze of maddening complexity through which
Jimmy moved quietly. He had spied several dock watchmen,
but the night's dampness and a generous bribe kept
them close to their shed, where a fire burned brightly in a
brazier, relieving the gloom. Nothing short of a riot would
get them away from the warmth. The Mockers would be
long removed from this area before those indifferent
guardians stirred. Reaching the designated meeting place, Jimmy çlooked
about and, seeing no one in sight, settled in to wait. He
was early, as was his habit, for he liked to compose his
mind before the action began. Additionally, there was
something in Laughing Jack's orders to him that made
him wary. A job this important was rarely a last-minute
affair, and even rarer was the Upright Man's allowing
anything to tempt the Prince's wrath - and purloining
royal wedding gifts would bring Arutha's wrath. But
Jimmy was not placed highly enough in the guild to know
if everything was on the up and up. He would simply
have to remain alert.
The soft hint of someone approaching caused çJimmy to
tense. Whoever was coming was moving cautiously, as
was to be expected, but with the faint footfalls he had
heard a strange sound. It was the slight clicking of metal
on wood and, as soon as recognition registered, Jimmy
leapt away. With a loud thud and an eruption of wood
splinters, a crossbow bolt ripped through the side of a
crate, where Jimmy had stood a moment before.
An instant later, two figures, dark silhouettes in the
grey night, appeared from out of the gloom, running
towards him.
Sword in hand, Laughing Jack rushed Jimmy without a
word, while his companion furiously cranked up his
crossbow for another shot. Jimmy drew weapons and
executed a parry of an overhand slash by Jack, diverting
the blade with his dirk, then lunging with his rapier in
return. Jack skipped to one side, and the two figures
squared off.
'Now we'll see how well you can use that toad sticker,
you snotty little bastard,' snarled Jack. "Watching you
bleed just might give me something to laugh about.'
Jimmy said nothing, refusing to engage in distracting
,conversation. His only reply was a high-line attack that
drove Jack back. He had no illusions about being a better
swordsman than Jack, he simply wanted to keep alive
long enough to gain a chance to flee.
Back and forth they moved, exchanging blows and
parries, each looking for an opening to finish the contest.
Jimmy tried for a' counterthrust and misjudged his position,
and suddenly fire erupted in his side. Jack had
managed to cut Jimmy with the edge of his sword, a
painful and potentially weakening wound, but not fatal,
at least not yet. Jimmy looked for more room to move,
feeling sick to his stomach from the pain, while Jack
pressed his advantage. Jimmy backed off from a furious
overhand slashing attack as Jack used the advantage of
his heavier blade to beat down Jimmy's guard.
A sudden shout telling Jack to get out of the way
warned Jimmy the other man had reloaded his crossbow.
Jimmy circled away from Jack, trying to keep çmoving
and put Jack between himself and Jack's accomplice.
Jack slashed at Jimmy, turning him back rapidly, and
then hacked downwards. The force of the blow dropped
Jimmy to his knees.
Abruptly Jack leapt backwards, as if a giant çhand had
seized him by the collar and yanked. He slammed against
a large crate and for an instant his eyes registered shocked
disbelief, then rolled up in his head as limp fingers lost
their grip on his sword. Jimmy saw that, where Jack's
chest had been, 'a bloody, pulped mass was left by the
passage of another crossbow bolt. But for the sudden
fury of Jack's attack, Jimmy would have received it in the
back. Without a sound Jack slumped, and Jimmy realized
he was pinned to the crate. Jimmy rose from his crouch,
spinning to confront the nameless man, who had tossed
away the crossbow with a curse. He pulled his sword and
rushed Jimmy. The man aimed a blow at Jimmy's head
and the boy ducked, catching his heel. He fell heavily
backwards into a sitting position while the man's swing
took him off balance slightly. Jimmy tossed his dirk at
the man. The man took the point of the long dagger
in the side and looked down at the wound, more an
inconvenience than an injury. But the brief distraction
was all Jimmy needed. An expression of uncomprehending
surprise crossed 'the nameless man's face as Jimmy
got to one knee and ran him through. Jimmy yanked away his ç
blade as the man fell. He
pulled his dirk from the dead man's side, then wiped off
and resheathed his blades. Slowly examining himself, he
found he was bleeding but would live.
Fighting off nausea, he walked to where Jack hung
against the crate. Looking at the Nightwarden, Jimmy
tried to gather his thoughts. He and Jack had never cared
a whit for each other, but why this elaborate trap? Jimmy
wondered if this was somehow tied up with the matter of
the assassin and the Prince. It was something he could
dwell on after he spoke to the Prince, for if there was a
direct relationship, it boded ill for the Mockers. The
possibility of a betrayal by one as highly placed as
Laughing jack would shake the guild to its foundation.
Never losing his perspective, Jimmy relieved Jack and
his companion of their purses, finding them both satisfactorily
full. As he finished looting Jack's companion, he
noticed something around the man's neck.
Reaching down, Jimmy came away with a gold chain,
upon which hung an ebony hawk. He studied the charm
for a few moments, then stuck it away in his tunic.
Looking around, he spied a likely-looking place to deposit
the bodies. He plucked Jack from off the bolt, dragged
him and the other man over to a nook formed by crates,
and tipped some heavy sacks down on top of them. He
turned the two damaged crates so the intact sides were
revealed. It might be days before someone uncovered the
corpses.
Ignoring his angry side and fatigue, Jimmy looked
around to make sure he was still unobserved, then vanishd
into the foggy gloom.

3
Plots

Arutha attacked furiously.
Laurie exhorted Gardan to better efforts as the Prince
forced his duelling companion into a retreat. The singer
had willingly surrendered the honour of the first bout to
Gardan, for he had been Arutha's partner every morning
upon the journey from Salador to Krondor. While the
practice had sharpened sword skills grown rusty in the
King's palace, he had tired of always losing to the
lightning-quick Prince. At least this morning he would
have someone with whom to share his defeat. Still, the
old campaigner wasn't without a trick or two and suddenly
Gardan had Arutha backing up. Laurie whooped when
he realized the captain had been lulling the Prince into a
false sense of control. But after a furious exchange the
Prince was again on the offensive, and Gardan was crying,
'Hold!' The chuckling Gardan backed away. "In all my years
there have been only three men who could best me with
the blade, Highness: Swordmaster Fannon, your father,
and now yourself.'
Laurie said, 'A worthy trio.' Arutha was about çto offer
a bout to Laurie when something caught his eye.
A large tree was situated in the corner of the palace
exercise yard, where it overhung a wall separating the
palace grounds from an alley and the city beyond. Something
was moving along the branches of the tree. Arutha
pointed. One of the palace guardsmen was already
moving towards the tree, his attention drawn there by the
Prince's stare.
Suddenly someone dropped from the branches, landing
lightly on his feet. Arutha, Laurie, and Gardan all stood
with swords held ready. The guardsman took the youth,
as they now clearly saw him to be, by the arm and led
him towards the Prince.
As they approached, a flicker of recoBnition crossed
Arutha's face. .Jimmy?'
Jimmy executed a bow, wincing slightly at the pain in
his side, poorly bandaged by himself that morning.
Gardan said, 'Highness, you know this lad?'
With a nod, Arutha said, 'Yes. He may be a little older
and a bit taller, but I know this young rogue. He's Jimmy
the Hand, already a legend among brigands and cutpurses
in the city. This is the boy thief who helped Anita and me
flee the city.'
Laurie studied the boy, then laughed. "I never saw him
clearly, for the warehouse was dark when Kasumi and I
were taken from Krondor by the Mockers, but by my
teeth, it's the same lad. "There's a party at Mother's."'
Jimmy grinned. "And a good time will be had by
all." '
Arutha said, 'So you know each other as well?'
'I told you once that when Kasumi and I were carrying
the peace message from the Tsurani Emperor to King
Rodric, there was a boy who had guided us from the
warehouse to the city gate and led away the guards while
we escaped Krondor. This was that boy, and I never
could remember his name.'
Arutha put up his sword, as did the others. 'Well then,
Jimmy, while I am glad to see you again, there is this
matter of climbing walls into my palace.'
Jimmy shrugged. 'I thought it possible you'd be willing
to see an old acquaintance, Highness, but I doubted I
could convince the captain's guards to send word.'
Gardan smiled at the brash answer and signalled the
guard to release his hold upon the boy's arm. 'Probably
you're right, Jack-a-rags.'
Jimmy suddenly became aware he looked a poor sight
to these men, used to the well-dressed and -groomed
inhabitants of the palace. From his raggedly cut hair
down to his dirty bare feet he looked every inch the
beggar boy. Then Jimmy saw the humour in Gardan's
eyes.'
:Don't let his appearance mislead you, Gardan. He's
far more capable than his years indicate.' To Jimmy,
Arutha said, "You throw some discredit upon Gardan's
guards by entering in this fashion. I expect you've reason
to seek me out?'
'Yes, Highness. Business most serious and urgent.'
Arutha nodded.
"Well then, what is this most serious and urgent business?'
"Someone has placed a price on your head.'
Gardan's face registered shock. Laurie said, "What
how?' "What leads you to think so?' asked Arutha.
'Because someone has already tried to collect.'

Besides Arutha, Laurie, and Gardan, two others listened to the boy's story
in the Prince's council chambers. Earl Volney of Landreth had formerly been
the assistant to the Principate Chancellor, Lord Dulanic, the Duke of
Krondor who disappeared during the viceroyalty of Guy du Bas-Tyra. At
Volney's side sat Father Nathan, a priest of Sung the White, Goddess of the
One Path, once one of Prince Erland's chief advisers and there at Gardan's
request. Arutha did not know these two men, but during the months of his
absence Gardan had come to trust their judgement, and that opinion counted
for much with Arutha. Gardan had been virtually acting Knight-Marshal of
Krondor, just as Volney had been acting Chancellor while Arutha had been
gone. Both men were stocky, but while Volney seemed one who had never known
labour, simply a man always stout, Nathan looked like a wrestler now going
to fat. Under that soft appearance strength still waited. Neither spoke
until Jimmy had finished recounting his two fights of the night before.
Volney studied the boy thief for a moment, looking at
him from under carefully combed, bushy eyebrows.
'Utterly fantastic. I simply don't wish to believe such a
plot can exist.'
Arutha had sat with his hands forming a tent before his
face, the fingers restlessly flexing. "I'd not be the first
prince targeted for an assassin's blade, Earl Volney.' He
said to Gardan, 'Double the guard at once, but quietly,)
with no explanation given. I do not want rumours flying
about the palace. Within two weeks we'll have every
noble in the Kingdom worth mention in these halls, as
well as my brother.'
Volney said, 'Perhaps you should warn His Majesty?'
'No,)' said Arutha flatly. 'Lyam will be travelling with a
full company of his Royal Household Guard. Have a
detachment of Krondorian Lancers meet them at Malac's
Cross, but no word that it is other than a formal honour
company. If a hundred soldiers can't protect him while
he rides, he can't be protected.
"No, our problem lies here in Krondor. We have no
choice in our options.'
'i'm not sure I follow, Highness,' said Father Nathan.
Laurie threw his eyes heavenward while Jimmy
grinned. Arutha smiled grimly. "I think our two streetwise
companions have a clear understanding of what must be
done.' Turning to face Jimmy and Laurie, Arutha said,
"We must catch a Nighthawk.'

Arutha sat quietly while Volney paced the dining hall.
Laurie, who had seen years enough of hunger to take
food when it was available, ate while the stout Earl of
Landreth stalked the hall. After watching Volney make
another circuit before the table, Arutha, in weary tones,
said, 'My lord Earl, must you pace so?'
The Earl, who was caught up in his own thoughts,
stopped abruptly. He bowed towards Arutha slightly, but
his expression was one of irritation. 'Highness, I'm sorry
to have disturbed you' - his tone showed he wasn't in the
least bit sorry, and Laurie smiled behind a joint of beef -
'but to trust that thief is sheer idiocy.'
Arutha's eyes widened and he looked at Laurie, who
returned his amazed expression. Laurie said, "My dear
Earl, you should cease being so circumspect. Come, just
speak your mind to the Prince. Be direct, man!'
Volney flushed as he realized his gaffe. "I beg your
pardon, I. . .' He seemed genuinely embarrassed.
Arutha smiled his crooked half-smile. 'Pardon granted,
volney, but only for the rudeness.' He studied Volney
for a quiet moment, then added, 'I find the candour
rather refreshing. Say on.
'Highness,)' Volney said firmly, 'for all we know, this
boy is but a part of some confidence game designed to
capture you, or to destroy you, as he claims others
intend.' 'And what would you have me do?'
Volney paused and shook his head slowly. "i don't
know, Highness, but sending the boy alone to gather
intelligence is . . . I don't know.'
Arutha said, "Laurie, tell my friend and counsellor the
Earl that all is well.'
Gulping down a mouthful of fine wine, Laurie said,
'All is well, Earl.' When Arutha threw the minstrel a
black look, Laurie added, 'in truth, sir, all possible is
being done. I know the ways of the city as well as any
man can who is not one of the Upright Man's own.
Jimmy's a Mocker. He may discover a lead to the Nighthawks
where a dozen spies will find none.'
'Remember,' said Arutha, 'I met Guy's captain of
secret police, Jocko Radburn, and he was a cunning,
ruthless man who stopped at nothing to try to recapture
Anita. The Mockers proved his match.'
Volney seemed to sag a little, then indicated he
required the Prince's permission to sit. Arutha waved
him to a chair, and as he sat he said, "Perhaps you are
right, singer. It is just that I have no means to answer this
threat. The thought of assassins running loose gives me
little ease.' Arutha leaned across the table. 'Less than myself?
Remember, Volney, it appeared I was the intended
target.'
Laurie nodded. 'it couldn't have been me they were
after.'
'Perhaps a music lover?' countered Arutha dryly.
Volney sighed. 'i am sorry if I am acting poorly in all
this. I have wished upon more than one occasion to be
done with this business of administering the Principality.'
'Nonsense, Volney,' said Arutha. "You've done a capital
job here. When Lyam insisted I make the eastern tour
with him, I objected on the grounds that the Western
Realm would suffer under any hand but my own - which
was because of the effects of Bas-Tyra's rule and no
comment upon your abilities. But I am pleased to see this
was not the case. I doubt that any could have done better
in running the daily affairs of the realm than you have,
Earl.'
"I thank His Highness,' said Volney, somewhat less
agitated for the compliment.
"In fact, I was going to ask you to stay on. With Dulanic
mysteriously gone, we've no Duke of Krondor to act on
behalf of the city. Lyam cannot announce the office
vacant - without dishonouring Dulanic's memory by stripping
him of the title - for another two years, but we can
 assume he is dead at Guy's or Radburn's hands. So
for the time being, I think we'll plan on' your acting the
part of Chancellor.'
Volney seemed less than pleased with this news, but
took the pronouncement with good ,grace. He simply
said, 'I thank His Highness for the trust.'
Further conversation was interrupted by the appearance
of Gardan, Father Nathan and Jimmy. Nathan's
bull neck bulged as he half carried Jimmy to a chair. The
boy's face was drained of colour and he was sweating.
Ignoring formality, Arutha pointed to a chair and the
priest deposited jimmy there.
"What is this?' asked Arutha.
Gardan half smiled, half looked disapproving. "This
young bravo has been running around since last night
with a nasty cut in his side. He bandaged it himself and
botched the job.'
"It had begun to fester,' added Nathan, "so I was forced
to clean and dress it. I insisted on treating it before we
came to see you, as the boy was turning feverish. It takes
no magic to keep a wound from putrefaction, but every
street boy thinks he is a chirurgeon. So the wound sours.'
He looked down at Jimmy. "He's a little pale from the
lancing, but he'll be fine in a few hours - as long as he
doesn't reopen the wound,' he added pointedly to Jimmy
Jimmy looked abashed. 'Sorry to put you to the trouble,
father, but under other circumstances, I would have had
the wound tended.'
Arutha looked at the boy thief. "What have you
discovered?'
'This business of catching assassins may be even more
difficult than we thought, Highness. There is a way to
make contact, but it is varied and roundabout.' Arutha
nodded for him to continue. 'I had to cadge a lot with the
street people, but here is what I have gleaned. Should
you wish to employ the services of the Guild of Death,
you must take yourself away to the Temple of lims-Kragma.'
Nathan made a sign of protection at mention of
the Death Goddess. 'A devotion is said and a votive
offering placed in the urn marked for such, but with the
gold sewn into a parchment, giving your name. You will
be contacted at their convenience within one day's time.
You name the victim, they name the price. You pay or
you don't. If you do, they tell you when and where to
drop the gold. If you don't, they vanish and you can't
reach them again.'
'Simple,' said Laurie. "They dictate when and where
so laying a trap will not be easy.'
'impossible, I should think,' said Gardan.
"Nothing is impossible,' said Arutha, his expression
showing he was deep in thought.
After a long moment Laurie said, "I have it!'
Arutha and the others looked at the singer. "Jimmy,
you said they will contact whoever leaves the gold within
the day.' Jimmy nodded. 'Then what we need to do is
have whoever leaves the gold stay in one place. A place
we control.'
Arutha said, 'A simple enough idea, once it's thought
of, Laurie. But where?'
Jimmy said, 'There are a few places we might take
over for a time, Highness, but those who own them are
unreliable . '
"I know a place,' said Laurie, "if friend Jimmy the
Hand is willing to say devotions, so the Nighthawks will
be less likely to think it a trap.'
'I don't know,' said Jimmy. "Things are funny in
Krondor. If I'm under suspicion, we might never get
another opportunity.' He reminded them of Jack's attack,
and of his unknown companion with the crossbow. 'it
may have been a grudge thing, I've known men to get
crazy over something even more trivial than a nickname,
but if it wasn't . . . If Jack was somehow involved with
that assassin . . . '
'Then,' said Laurie, "the Nighthawks have turned an
officer of the Mockers to their cause.'
Jimmy looked upset, as he suddenly dropped his mask
of bravado. 'That thought has troubled me as much as
the .thought of someone sticking his Highness with a
crossbow bolt. I've been neglecting my oath to the Mockers.
I should have told all last night, and certainly I must
now.' He seemed ready to rise.
Volney placed a firm hand upon Jimmy's shoulder.
'Presumptuous boy. Are you saying some league of cutthroats
merits even a moment's consideration in light of
the danger to your Prince and possibly your King?'
jimmy seemed on the verge of a retort when Arutha
said, "I think that's exactly what the boy said, Volney. He
has given oath.'
Laurie quickly stepped over to where the boy sat.
Moving Volney to one side, he leaned down so his face
was level with Jimmy's. "You have your concerns, we
know, lad, but things seem to be moving rapidly. If the
Mockers have been infiltrated, then speaking too soon
could make those who have been placed there cover
tracks. If we can get one of these Nighthawks . . .' He
left the thought unfinished.
Jimmy nodded. 'if the Upright Man will only follow
your logic, I may survive, singer. I come close to past the
time when I may cover my actions with a facile story.
Soon I will be at an accounting. Very well, I'll take a
note to the Drawer of Nets' temple. And I will play no
mummery when I ask her to make a place for me should
it be my time.'
'And,' said Laurie, "I must be off to see an old friend
about the loan of an inn.'
'Good,' said Arutha. 'We will spring the .snare
tomorrow.'
While Volney, Nathan, and Gardan watched, Laurie
and Jimmy departed, deep in conversation as they made
plans. Arutha followed their departure as well, his dark
eyes masking the quietly burning rage he felt. After so
many years of strife during the Riftwar he had returned
to Krondor hoping for a long, peaceful life with Anita.
Now someone dared to threaten that peaceful life. And
that someone would pay dearly.

The Rainbow Parrot Inn was quiet. The storm windows
had been closed against a sudden squall off the Bitter
Sea, so the taproom lay blanketed in haze, blue smoke
from the fireplace and a dozen patron's pipes. To any
casual observer the inn looked much as it would have on
other rainy nights. The owner, Lucas, and his two sons
stood behind the long bar, one of them occasionally
moving through the door to the kitchen to get meals and
carry them to the tables. In the corner near the fireplace,
opposite the stairs to the second floor, a blond minstrel
sang softly of a sailor who is far from home.
Close inspection would have revealed that the men
at the tables barely touched their ale. While rough in
appearance, they didn't have the air of workers from the
docks and sailors fresh in from sea voyages. They all
possessed a certain hard-eyed look, and their scars were
earned in past battles rather than tavern brawls. All were
members of Gardan's company of Household Guard,
some of the most seasoned veterans of the Armies of the
'West during the Riftwar. In the kitchen five new cooks
and apprentices worked. Upstairs, in the room closest to
the head of the stairway, Arutha, Gardan, and five
soldiers waited patiently. In total, Arutha had placed
twenty-four men in the inn. Arutha's men were the only
ones present, as the last local had left when the storm
commenced.
In the corner farthest from the door, Jimmy the Hand
waited. Something had troubled him all day, though he
couldn't put his finger on it. But he knew one thing: if he
himself had entered this room this night, his experience-bred
caution would have warned him away. He hoped
the Nighthawks' agent wasn't as perceptive. Something
here just wasn't right.
Jimmy sat back and absently nibbled at the cheese,
pondering what was askew. It was an hour after sundown,
and still no sign of anyone who might be from the
Nighthawks. Jimmy had come straight from the temple,
making sure he had been seen by several beggars who
knew him well. If any in Krondor wished to find him,
word of his whereabouts could be purchased easily and
cheaply.

The front door opened and two men came in from the
rain, shaking water from their cloaks. Both appeared to
be fighting men, perhaps bravos who had earned a fair
purse of silver protecting some merchant's caravans. They
wore similar attire: leather armour, calf-length boots,
broadswords at their sides, and shields slung over their
backs under the protective cloaks.
The taller fellow, with a grey streak through his dark
hair, ordered ales. The other, a thin blond man, looked
about the room. Something in the way his eyes narrowed
alarmed Jimmy: he also sensed something different in the
inn. He spoke softly to his companion. The man with the
grey lock nodded, then took the ales presented by the
barman. Paying with coppers, the two men moved to the
only available table, the one next to Jimmy's.
The man with the grey lock turned towards Jimmy and
said, 'Lad, is this inn always so sombre?' Jimmy then
realized what the problem had been all day. In their
waiting, the guards had fallen into" the soldier's habit of
speaking softly. The room was free of the usual commonroom
din.
Jimmy held his forefinger before his lips and whispered,
"It is the singer.' The man turned his head and listened to
Laurie for a moment. Laurie was a gifted performer and
was in good voice despite his long day's work. When he
finished, Jimmy banged his ale jack hard upon the table
and shouted, ' minstrel, more, more!' as he tossed a
silver coin towards the dais upon which Laurie sat. His
outburst was followed a moment later by similar shouting
and cheering as the others realized the need of some
display. Several other coins were tossed. When Laurie
struck up another tune, lively and bawdy, a sound not
unlike the normal buzz of conversation returned to the
taproom. The two strangers settled back into their chairs and
listened, occasionally speaking to each other. They visibly
relaxed as the mood in the room shifted to resemble what
they had expected. Jimmy sat for a while, watching the
two men at the next table. Something about these two
was out of place, something that nagged at him as had
the false note in the common room only moments before.
The door opened again and another man entered. He
looked around the room as he shook water from his
hooded great cloak, but he didn't remove the voluminous
COVering or lower the cowl. He spied Jimmy and crossed
to his table. Without waiting for invitation, he pulled out
a chair and sat. In hushed tones he said, 'Have you a
name?'
Jimmy nodded and leaned forward as if to speak. As
he did so, four facts suddenly struck him. The men at the
next table, despite their casual appearance, had swords
and shields close at hand, needing only an instant to
bring them to the ready. They didn't drink like mercenaries
fresh into town after a long caravan, in fact, their
drinks were nearly untouched. The man opposite Jimmy
had one hand hidden under his cloak, as he had since'
entering. But most revealing of all, all three men wore
large black rings on their left hands, with a hawk device
carved in them, one similar to the talisman taken from
Laughing Jack's companion. Jimmy's mind worked furiously,
for he had seen such rings before and understood
their use.
Improvising, Jimmy pulled a parchment out of his boot.
He placed it on the table, to the far right of the man,
making him stretch awkwardly across himself to reach for
it while he kept his right hand hidden. As the man's hand
touched the parchment, Jimmy pulled his dirk out and
struck, pinning the man's hand to the table. The man
froze at the sudden attack, then his other hand came
from within his cloak, holding a dagger. He slashed at
jimmy as the boy thief fell backwards. Then pain struck the man and
he howled in agony. Jimmy, tumbling over
his chair, shouted, 'Nighthawks!' as he struck the floor.
The room exploded with activity. Lucas's sons, both
veterans of the Armies of the West, came leaping over
the bar, landing on the swordsmen at the table next to
Jimmy as they attempted to rise. Jimmy found himself
hanging backwards atop the overtUrned chair and awkwardly
tried to pull himself upright. From his position he
could see the barmen grappling with the grey-lock man.
The other false mercenary had his left hand before his
face, his ring to his lips. Jimmy shouted, 'Poison rings!
They have poison rings!'
Other guards had the hooded man in their grip as he
frantically tried to remove his ring from his pinned hand.
After another moment he was held tightly by the three
men around him, unable to move.
The grey-lock man kicked out at the barmen, rolled
away, leapt up, and dashed towards the door, knocking
aside two men surprised by the sudden move. For a
moment a clear path to the door appeared as curses filled
the room from soldiers attempting to navigate the jumble
of tables and chairs. The Nighthawk was nearing the door
and freedom when a slender fighter interposed himself.
The assassin leapt towards the door. With near-inhuman
speed Arutha stepped forward and struck the grey-locked
man a blow to the head with his rapier's hilt. The stunned
.man teetered for a moment, then collapsed to the floor,
un conscious.
Arutha stood erect and looked about the room. The
blond assassin lay with eyes staring blankly upwards
obviously dead. The hooded man's cloak was thrown
back and he was white with pain as the dagger pinning
his hand to the table was pulled loose. Three soldiers
held him down, though he looked too weak to stand
upon his own feet. When the dirk was pulled from the
table, he screamed and passed out.
Jimmy stepped gingerly around the dead man and came
up to Arutha. He looked down to where Gardan was
removing the other black ring from the man on the floor
and then the boy grinned at Arutha. Holding up his
hand, he counted two on his fingers.
The Prince, still flushed from the struggle, smiled and
nodded. None of his men appeared wounded and he had
two assassins in tow. He said to Gardan, 'Guard them
closely and let no one who is not known to us see them
when you take them into the palace. I'll have no rumours
flying around. Lucas and others may be in danger enough
when these three turn up missing, should others from the
Guild of Death be about. Leave enough of this company
to keep up the appearance of normal business until
closing, and pay Lucas double the damages, with our
thanks.'' Even as he spoke, cardan's company was restoring
the inn to order, removing the broken table and
moving the others about so it would not be noticed
missing. "Take these two to the rooms I have chosen and
be quick about it. We shall begin questioning tonight.'

Guards blocked a door leading to a remote wing of the
palace. The rooms were used only occasionally by guests
of minor importance. The wing was a recent construction,
being accessible from the main buildings of the palace by
a single short hall and a single outside doorway. The
outside door was bolted from within and was posted with
two guards without, who had orders that absolutely no
one, no matter who, was to enter or leave by that door.
Inside the wing all the outer rooms had been secured.
In the centre of the largest room of the suite Arutha
studied his two prisoners. Both were tied to stout wooden
beds by heavy ropes. Arutha was taking no chances on
their attempting suicide. Father Nathan supervised his
acolytes, who tended the two assassins' wounds.
Abruptly one of the acolytes moved away from the bedside of
the man with the grey lock. He looked at Father
Nathan, his face betraying confusion. 'Father, come see.'
Jimmy and Laurie followed behind the priest and
Arutha. Nathan stepped up behind the acolyte and all
heard his sharp intake of breath. 'Sung show us the way.'
The grey-locked man's leather armour had been cut away,
revealing a black tunic beneath embroidered with a silver
fisher's net. Nathan pulled away the other prisoner's
robe. Beneath that robe was another, of night's black
colour, also with' a silver net over his heart. The prisoner's
hand had been bandaged and he had regained consciousness.
He glared defiantly at the priest of Sung, naked
hatred in his' eyes.
Nathan motioned the Prince aside. 'These men wear
the mark of lims-Kragma in her guise as the Drawer of
Nets, she who gathers all to her in the end.'
Arutha nodded. 'it fits in. We know the Nighthawks
are contacted through the temple. Even should the hierarchy
of the temple be ignorant of this business, someone
within the temple must be a confederate of ' the Nighthawks.
Come, Nathan, we must question this other one.
They returned to the bed where the conscious man lay.
Looking down upon him, Arutha said, "Who offers the
price for my death?'
Nathan was called to attend the unconscious man.
.Who are you?' demanded the Prince of the other.
'Answer now, or the pain you've endured will be merely
a hint of what will be visited upon you.' Arutha did not
enjoy the prospect of torture, but he would not stop at
any means to discover who was responsible for the attack
upon him. The question and the threat were answered by
silence. After a moment Nathan returned to Arutha's side.
'The other is dead,' he said softly. 'We must treat this
one cautiously. That man should not have died from your
blow to the head. They may have means to command the
body not to fight against death, but to welcome it. It is
said even a hardy man may will himself to death, given
enough time.'
Arutha noticed sweat beading upon the brow of the
wounded man as Nathan examined him. With concern on
his face, the priest said, 'He is fevered, 'and it rises apace.
I will have to tend him before there can be an accounting.'
The priest quickly fetched his potion and forced some
fluid down the man's throat as soldiers held his jaws
apart. Then the priest began to intone his clerical marc.
The man on the bed began to writhe frantically, his face
a contorted mask of concentration. Tendons stood out on
his arms, and his neck was a mass of ropy cords as he
struggled against his confinement. Suddenly he let forth a
hollow-sounding laugh and fell back, eyes closed.
Nathan examined the man. "He is unconscious, Highness.'
The priest added, 'i have slowed the fever's rise,
but I don't think I can halt it. Some magic agency works
here. He fails before our eyes. It will take time to counter
whatever magic is at work upon him . . . if I have the
time.' There was doubt in Nathan's voice. "And if my arts
are equal to the task.'
Arutha turned to Gardan. 'Captain, take ten of your
most trusted men and make straight for the Temple of
lims-Kragma. Inform the High Priestess I command her
attendance at once. Bring her by force if needs be, but
bring her.'
Gardan saluted, but there was a flicker in his eyes.
Laurie and Jimmy knew he disliked the thought of bearding
the priestess in her own halls. Still, the staunch
captain turned and obeyed his Prince without comment.
Arutha returned to the stricken man, who lay in fevered
torment. Nathan said, 'Highness, the fever rises, slowly,
but it rises.'
'How long will he live?'
'if we can do nothing, through the balance of the night,
no longer.'
Arutha struck his left hand with his balled right fist in
frustration. There was less than six hours before dawn.
Less than six hours to discover the cause for the attack
upon him. And should this man die, they would be back
where they started, and worse, for his unknown enemy
would not likely fall into another snare.
"is there anything else you can do?' asked Laurie softly.
Nathan considered. 'Perhaps . . .' He moved away
from the ill man and motioned his acolytes away from the
bedside. With a gesture he indicated that one of them
should bring him a large volume of priestly spells.
Nathan instructed the acolytes and they quickly did his
bidding, knowing the ritual and their parts in it. A
pentagram was chalked upon the floor, and many runic
symbols laid within its boundary, with the bed at the
centre. When they were finished, everyone who stood
within the room was encompassed by the chalk marks
upon the floor. A lighted candle was Placed at every
point of the design, and a sixth given to Nathan, who
stood studying the book. Nathan began waving the light
in an intricate pattern while he read aloud in a language
unknown to the nonclerics in the room. His acolytes
stood quietly to one side, responding in unison at several
points during the incantation. The others felt a strange
stilling of the air, and as the final syllables were uttered,
the dying man groaned, a low and piteous sound.
Nathan snapped shut the book. "Nothing less powerful
than an agent of the gods themselves may pass through
the boundaries of the pentagram without my leave. No
spirit, demon, or being sent by any dark agency can
trouble us now.' Nathan then directed everyone to stand outside the
pentagram, opened the book again, and began reading
another chant. Quickly the words tumbled from the
stocky priest. He finished the spell and pointed at the
man upon the bed. Arutha looked at the ill man but
could see nothing amiss, then, as he turned to speak to
Laurie, noticed a change. Seeing the man from the corner
of his eye, Arutha could discern a nimbus of faint light
around him, filling the pentagram, not visible when
viewed directly. It was a light, milky quartz in colour.
Arutha asked, "What is this?'
Nathan faced Arutha. "I have slowed his passage
through time, Highness. To him an hour is now a
moment. The spell will last only until dawn, but to him
less than a quarter of an hour will have passed. Thus we
gain time. With luck, he will now linger until midday.'
"Can we speak to him?'
'No, for we would sound like buzzing bees to him. But
if we need, I can remove the spell.'
Arutha regarded the slowly writhing, fevered man. His
hand seemed poised a scant inch above the bed, hanging
in space. 'Then,' said the Prince impatiently, 'we must
wait upon the pleasure of the High Priestess of lims-Kragma.'

The wait was not long, nor was there much pleasure
evident in the manner of the High Priestess. There was a
commotion outside, and Arutha hurried to the door.
Beyond it he found Gardan waiting with a woman in
black robes. Her face was hidden behind a thick, gauzy
black veil, but her head turned towards the Prince.
A finger shot out towards Arutha, and a deep, pleasantsounding
feminine voice said, "Why have I been commanded
here, Prince of the Kingdom?'
"'Arutha ignored the question as he took in the scene.
 Behind Gardan stood a quartet of Guards, spears held
across their chests, barring the way to a group of determined-
looking temple guards wearing the black and silver
tabards of lims-Kragma. "What passes, Captain?'
Gardan said, 'The lady wishes to bring her guards
within, and I have forbidden it.'
In tones of icy fury the priestess said, 'I have come as
you bid, though never have the clergy acknowledged
temporal authority. But I will not come as a prisoner, not
even for you, Prince of Krondor.
Arutha said, 'Two guards may enter, but they will
stand away from the prisoner. Madam, you will cooperate
and enter, now.' Arutha's tone left little doubt of his
mood. The High Priestess might be commander of a
powerful sect, but before her stood the ruler of the
Kingdom absolute, save the King, a man who would
brook no interference in some matter of paramount
importance. She nodded to the two foremost guards, and
they entered. The door was closed behind them, and the
two guards were taken off to one side by Gardan.
Outside, the palace guards kept watchful eyes upon the
remaining temple guards and the wicked curved swords
carried at their belts.
Father Nathan greeted the High Priestess with a stiffly
formal bow, their two orders having little affection for
each other. The High Priestess chose to ignore the priest's
presence.
Her first remark upon seeing the pentagram upon the
floor was "Do you fear otherworld interference?' Her
tone was suddenly analytical and even.
It was Nathan who answered. "Lady, we are not sure of
many things, but we do seek to prevent complications
from whatever source, physical or spiritual.'
She did not acknowledge his words but stepped as
close to the two men, one dead and the other wounded,
as she could. Seeing the black tunics, she faltered a step,
then turned to face Arutha. Through the veil he could
almost feel her malevolent gaze upon him. 'These men
are of my order. How do they come to lie here?'
Arutha's face was a mask of controlled anger. "Madam,
it is to answer that question that you have been fetched.
Do you know these two?'
She studied their faces. "I do not know this one,' she
said, pointing to the dead man with the grey lock in his
hair. "But the other is a priest of my temple, named
Morgan, newly come to us from our temple in Yabon.'
She paused for a moment as she considered something.
'He wears the mark of a brother of the Order of the
Silver Net.' Her head came around, facing Arutha once
more. 'They are the martial arm of our faith, supervised
by their Grand Master in Rillanon. And he answers to
none save our Mother Matriarch for his order's practices.'
She paused again. 'And then only sometimes.' Before
anyone could comment, she continued. 'What I do not
understand is how one of my temple priests came to wear
their mark. Is he a member of the order, passing himself
off as a priest? Is he a priest playing the part of a warrior?
Or is he neither priest nor brother of the order, but an
impostor on both counts? Any of those three possibilities
is forbidden, at risk of lims-Kragma's wrath. Why is he
here?'
Arutha said, "Madam, if what you say is true' - she
seemed to tense at the implication of a 'possible falsehood
'then what is occurring concerns your temple as much
as it concerns me. Jimmy, speak what you know of the
Nighthawks . '
Jimmy, obviously uncomfortable under the scrutiny of
the Death Goddess's High Priestess, spoke quickly and
forwent his usual embellishments. When he finished, the
High' Priestess said, 'Highness, what you say is a deed
foul in the nostrils of our goddess.' Her voice was cold
rage. in times past, certain of the faithful sought sacrifices,
but those practices are long abandoned. Death is a
patient goddess, all will come to know her in time. We
need no black murders. I would speak to this man.' She
indicated the prisoner.
arutha hesitated and noticed Father Nathan shaking
his head slightly. 'He is close to death, less than hours
without any additional stress upon him. Should the questioning
prove rigorous, he might die before we can plumb
the depths of these dark waters.'
The High Priestess said, 'What cause for concern,
priest? Even dead, he is still my subject. I am LimaKragma's
 ephemeral hand. In her manor I will find truths
no living man can obtain.'
Father Nathan bowed. 'in the realm of death, so you
are supreme.' To Arutha he said, 'May my brothers and
I withdraw, Highness? My order finds these practices
offensive.'
The Prince nodded, and the High Priestess said, 'Before
you go, remove the prayer of slowness you have called
down upon him. It will cause less difficulty than should I
do it.'
Nathan quickly complied and the man on the bed
began to groan feverishly. The priest and acolytes of
Sung hurriedly left the room, and when they were gone,
the High Priestess said, 'This pentagram will aid in
keeping outside forces from interfering with this act. I
would ask all to remain outside, for within its bounds
each person creates ripples in the fabric of magic. This is
a most holy rite, for whatever the outcome, our lady will
most surely claim this man.'
Arutha and the others waited outside the pentagram
and the priestess said, 'Speak only when I have given
permission, and ensure the candles do not burn out, or
forces may be loosed that would prove . . . troublesome
to recall.' The High Priestess drew back her black veil,
and Arutha was almost shocked at her appearance. She
looked barely more than a girl, and a lovely one at that,
with blue eyes and skin the colour of dawn's blush. Her
eyebrows promised her hair would be the palest gold.
She raised her hands overhead and began to pray. Her
voice was soft, musical, but the words were strange and
fearful to hear.
The man on the bed squirmed as she continued her
incantation. Suddenly his eyes opened and he stared
upwards. He seemed to convulse, straining at the beads
that restrained him. He relaxed, then turned to face the
High Priestess. A distant look crossed his face, as his
eyes seemed to focus and unfocus in turn. After a moment
a strange, sinister smile formed on his lips, an expression
of mocking cruelty. His mouth opened and the voice
that issued forth was deep and hollow. 'What service,
mistress?"
The High Priestess's brow furrowed slightly as if there
was something askew in his manner, but she maintained
her poise and said in commanding tones, "You wear the
mantle of the Order of the Silver Net, yet you practise in
the temple. Explain this falsehood.'
The man laughed, a high shrieking cackle that trailed
off. 'I am he who serves.'
She stopped, for the answer was not to her liking.
'Answer then, who do you serve?'
There came another laugh and the man's body tensed
once more, pulling against the restraining ropes. Beads
of sweat popped out upon his brow, and the muscles of
his arms corded as he drew himself against the ropes.
Then he relaxed and laughed again. 'I am he who is
caught.'
"Who do you serve?'
'I am he who is a fish. I am in a net.' Again came the
mad laughter and the near-convulsive straining at the
ropes. As the man strained, sweat poured off his face in
rivulets. Shrieking, he pulled again and again at the
restraints. As it seemed he would break his own bones
with exertion, the man screamed, "Murmandamus! Aid
your servant!'
Abruptly one of the candles blew out as a wind from some unknown
place swept across the room. The man
reacted with a single convulsive spasm, bowing his body
in a high arch, with only his feet and head touching the
bed, pulling against the ropes with such force that his
skin tore and bled. Suddenly he collapsed upon the bed.
The High Priestess fell back a step, then crossed to look
down on the man. Softly she said, 'He is dead. Relight
the candle. '
Arutha motioned and a guard lit a taper from another
candle and relit the extinguished one. The priestess began
another incantation. While the first had been mildly
discomforting, this one carried a feeling of dread, a chill
from the farthest corner of some lost and frozen land of
wretchedness. It carried the echo of the cries of those
without comfort or hope. Yet within it was another
quality, powerful and attractive, an almost seductive
feeling that it would somehow be wonderful to lay aside
all burdens and rest. As the spell continued, the feelings
of foreboding increased, and those who waited fought
against the desire to run far from the sound of the High
Priestess's spell casting.
Suddenly the spell was over, and the room lay as quiet
as a tomb . The High Priestess spoke in the King's Tongue.
'You who are with us in body but are now subject to the
will of our mistress, lims-Kragma, hearken to me. As
our Lady of Death commands all things in the end, so do
I now command you in her name. Return!'
The form on the bed stirred but lay silent once more ~
The High Priestess shouted, "Return!' and the figure
moved again. With a sudden movement the dead man's
head came up and his eyes opened. He seemed to be
looking around the room, but while his eyes were open,
they remained rolled back up in his head, only the whites
showing. Still there was some feeling that the corpse
could yet see, for his head stopped moving as if he was
looking at the High Priestess. His mouth opened and
a distant, hollow laugh issued from it.
The High Priestess stepped forward. "Silence!'
The dead man quieted, but then the face grinned, a
slowly broadening, terrible, and evil expression. The
features began to twitch, moving as if the man's face
were subject to some strange palsy. The very flesh shivered,
then sagged, as if turned to heated wax. The skin
colour subtly shifted, becoming fairer, almost pale white.
The forehead became higher and the chin more delicate,
the nose more arched and the ears pointed. The hair
darkened to black. Within moments the man they had
questioned was gone and in his place lay a form no longer
human.
Softly Laurie spoke. 'By the gods! A Brother of the
Dark Path!'
Jimmy shifted his weight uncomfortably. "Your Brother
Morgan is from a lot farther north than Yabon city, lady,'
he whispered. There was no humour in his tone, only
fear.
Again came the chill wind from some unknown quarter,
and the High Priestess turned towards Arutha. Her eyes
were wide with fear and she seemed to speak, but none
could hear her words.
The creature on the bed, one of the hated dark cousins
to the elves, shrieked in maniacal glee. With a shocking
and sudden display of strength, the moredhel ripped one
arm free of its bond, then the other. Before the' guards
could react, it tore free the bonds holding its legs.
Instantly the dead thing was on its feet, leaping towards
the High Priestess.

The woman stood resolute, a feeling of power radiating  from her.
She pointed her hand at the creature. 'Halt!'
The moredhel obeyed. 'By my mistress's power, I command
obedience from you who are called. In her domain
do you dwell and subject you are to her laws and
ministers. By her power do I order you back!'
The moredhel faltered a moment, then with startling
quickness reached out and with one hand seized the High
Priestess by the throat. In that hollow, distant voice it
screamed, 'Trouble not my servant, lady. If you love
your mistress so dearly, then to her go!'
The High Priestess gripped its wrist, and blue fire sprang to life along
the creature's arm. With a howl of pain it picked her up as if she weighed
nothing and hurled her against the wall near Arutha, where she crashed and
slid to the floor. All stood motionless. The transformation of this
creature  and its unexpected attack upon the High Priestess robbed all in
the room of volition. The temple guards were rooted by the sight of their
priestess humbled by some dark, otherworld power. Gardan and his men were
equally stunned. With another booming howl of laughter the creature
turned towards Arutha.
"Now, Lord of the West, we are
met, and it is your hour!' The moredhel swayed upon its feet a moment, then
stepped towards Arutha. The temple guards recovered
an instant before Gardan's men. The two black-and-silver-
clad soldiers leapt forward, one interposing himself
between the advancing moredhel and the stunned priestess,
the other attacking the creature. Arutha's soldiers
were only a step behind in preventing the creature from
reaching Arutha. Laurie sprang for the door, shouting
for the guards without.
The temple guard thrust with his scimitar and impaled
the moredhel. Sightless eyes widened, showing red rims,
as the creature grinned, a horrid expression of glee. In an
instant its hands shot forward and were around the
guard's throat. With a twisting motion it broke the guard's
neck, then tossed him aside. The first of Arutha's guards
to reach the creature struck from the side, a blow that
gouged a bloody furrow along its back. With a backhand
slap it knocked the guard down. It reached down and
pulled the scimitar out of its own chest and with a snarl
tossed it aside. As it turned away, Gardan hit it low and
from behind. The huge captain encircled the creature
with his powerful arms, lifting it from the ground. The
creature's claws raked Gardan's arms, but still he held it
high, preventing its progress towards Arutha. Then the
creature kicked backwards, its heel striking Gardan in
the 'leg, causing both to fall. The creature rose. As
Gardan tried to reach it again, he stumbled over the
body of the fallen temple guard.
The door flew open as Laurie tossed aside the inner
bar, and palace and temple guards raced past the singer
The creature was within a sword's thrust of Arutha when
the first guard tackled it from behind, followed an instant
later by two more. The temple guards joined their lone
fellow in forming a defence around the unconscious High
Priestess. Arutha's guards joined in the assault upon the
moredhel. Gardan recovered from his fall and rushed to
Arutha's side. 'Leave, Highness. We can hold it here by
weight of numbers.'
Arutha, with sword ready, said, 'How long, Gardan?
How can you stop a creature already dead?'
. Jimmy the Hand backed away from Arutha's side,
moving towards the door. He couldn't take his eyes from
the knot of writhing bodies. guards hammered' at the
creature with hilts and fists, seeking to bludgeon it into
submission. Hands and faces were sticky red as the
creatures claws raked out again and again.
Laurie circled around the melee, looking for an opening,
his sword pointed like a dagger. Catching sight of
jimmy as the thief bolted towards the door, Laurie
shouted, "Arutha, Jimmy shows uncommon good sense.
Leave!' then he thrust with his sword and a low, chilling
moan came from within the jumble of bodies.
Arutha was gripped by indecision. The mass seemed to
be inching towards him, as if the weight of the guards
served only to slow the creature's progress. The creature's
voice rang out. 'Flee, if you will, Lord of the West, but
you shall never find refuge from my servants.' As if gifted
by some additional surge of power, the moredhel heaved
mightily and the guards were cast aside. They crashed
into those standing before the High Priestess, and for a
moment the creature was free to stand upright. Now it
was covered in blood, its face a mask of bleeding wounds.
Torn flesh hung from one cheek, transforming the moredhel's
 face into a permanent, baleful grin. One guard
managed to rise and shatter the creature's right arm with
a sword blow. It spun and tore the man's throat out with
a single rake of its hand. With its right arm dangling
uselessly at its side, the moredhel spoke through loose,
rubbery lips, its voice a bubbling, wet noise. "I feed on
death! Come. I shall feed on yours!'
Two soldiers jumped upon the moredhel from behind,
driving it to the floor once more, before Arutha. Ignoring
the guards, the creature clawed towards the Prince, its
good arm outstretched, fingers hooked like a claw. More
guards leapt upon it, and Arutha darted forward, driving
his sword through the creature's shoulder, deep into
its back. The monstrous figure shuddered briefly, then
resumed its forward motion.
Like some giant, obscene crab, the mass of bodies
inched slowly towards the Prince. The activities of the
guards increased, as if they would protect Arutha by
literally tearing the creature to shreds. Arutha took a
step back, his reluctance to flee slowly overbalanced by
the refusal of the moredhel to be stopped. With a cry, a
soldier was tossed away, to land hard, his head striking
the stone floor with an audible crack. Another shouted
'Highness, it grows in strength!' A third screamed as he
had an eye clawed out by the frantic creature. WIth a
titanic heave, it tossed the remaining soldiers away and
rose, with no one between itself and Arutha.
Laurie tugged at Arutha's left sleeve, leading the Prince
slowly towards the door. They walked sideways, never
taking their eyes from the loathsome creature, while it
stood swaying upon its feet. Its sightless eyes followed
the two men, glaring from a skull rendered a pulpy red
mask devoid of recognizable features. One of the High
Priestess's guards charged the creature from behind, and
without looking, the moredhel lashed backwards with its
right hand and crushed the man's skull with a single blow.
Laurie cried, 'it has the use of its arm once more. It's
healing itself.' the creature was upon them in a leap.
Suddenly Arutha felt himself going down as someone
shoved him aside. In a blur of images, Arutha saw
Laurie ducking away from the blow that would have torn
Arutha's head from his shoulders. Arutha rolled away
and came to his feet beside Jimmy the Hand. The boy
had knocked him out of harm's way. Beyond Jimmy,
Arutha could see Father Nathan.
' The bull-necked priest approached the monster, his left
hand held upright, palm forward. The creature somehow
sensed the priest's approach, for it turned its attention
from Arutha and spun to face Nathan.
The centre of Nathan's hand began to glow, then shine
with a fierce white light that cast a visible beam upon the
moredhel, which stood transfixed. From its torn lips a
thin moan was emitted. Then Nathan began to chant.
'A high shriek erupted from the moredhel, and it
cowered, covering sightless eyes from the glare of
Nathan's mystic light. Its voice could be heard, low and
Wailing. "it burns . . . it burns!' the stocky cleric took a
Step forward, forcing the creature to shamble backwards.
The thing looked nothing mortal, bleeding thick, nearly
coagulated blood from a hundred wounds, large pieces of
flesh and clothing dangling from its form. It hunkered
lower and cried out, 'I burn!'
Then a cold wind blew in the room and the creature
shrieked, loud enough to startle even seasoned, battle-ready
soldiers. Guards looked furiously about, seeking
the source of some nameless horror that could be felt on
every side.
The creature suddenly rose up, as if new power had
come into it. Its right hand shot out, grabbing at the
source of the burning light, Nathan's left hand. Fingers
and talon-like fingers interlaced, and with a searing sound
the creature's hand began to smoke. The moredhel drew
back its left hand to strike a blow at the cleric, but as it
uncoiled to strike, Nathan shouted a word unknown to
the others In the room, and the creature faltered and
groaned. Nathan's voice rang out, filling the room with
the sounds of mystic prayer and holy magic. The creature
froze for an instant, then trembled in place. Nathan
stepped up the urgency of his incantation and the creature
reeled as if being struck a mighty blow, and smoke rose
from its body. Nathan called down the power of his
goddess, Sung the White, the deity of purity, his voice
hoarse and strained. A loud moaning, seeming to come
from a great distance, escaped from the moredhel's mouth
and it shuddered again. Locked in this mystic battle,
Nathan liNed his shoulders as if he were struggling to
move away a great weight, and the moredhel fell to its
knees. Its right hand bent backwards as Nathan's voice
droned on. Beads of sweat rolled down the priest's
forehead and the cords on his neck stood out. Blisters
rose on the creature's ragged flesh and exposed muscle
and it began an ululating cry. A sizzling sound and the
smell of cooking meat filled the room. Thick oily smoke
poured off its body, and one guard turned his head and
vomited. Nathan's eyes grew wide as he exerted the force
of his will upon this creature. Slowly they swayed, the
creature's flesh cracking as it blackened and crisped from
Nathan's magic. The moredhel beat backwards under the
force of the priest's grip, and suddenly blue energy
coursed over its blackening body. Nathan released his
hold and the creature toppled sideways, flames erupting
from its eyes, mouth, and ears. Soon flames engulfed the
body and reduced it quickly to ashes, choking the room
with a foul, greasy odour.
Nathan slowly turned to face Arutha, and the Prince
saw a man suddenly aged. The cleric's eyes were wide
and sweat poured down his face. In a dry croak he said,
"highness, it is done.' Taking one slow step, then another,
towards the Prince, Nathan smiled weakly. Then he fell
forward, to be caught by Arutha before he struck the
floor. 4

Revelations

Birds sang to welcome the new dawn.
Arutha, Laurie, Jimmy, Volney, and Gardan sat in
the Prince's private audience chamber awaiting word of
Nathan and the High Priestess. The temple guards had
carried the priestess to a guest chamber and stood guard
while healers summoned from her temple attended her.
They had been with her all night, while members of
Nathan's order tended him in his quarters.
. Everyone in the room had been rendered silent by the
horors of the night, and all were reluctant to speak of it.
Laurie stirred first from the numbness, leaving his chair
to move to a window.
Arutha's eyes followed Laurie's movement, but his mind was wrestling
with a dozen unanswerable questions.
Who or what was seeking his death? And why? But more
important to him than his own safety was the question of
what threat this posed for Lyam, Carline, and the others
due to arrive soon. And most of all, was there any risk to
Anita? A dozen times over the last few hours Arutha had
considered postponing the wedding.
Laurie sat down on a couch next to the half-dozing
Jimmy. Quietly he asked, 'Jimmy, )how did you know to
fetch Father Nathan when the High Priestess herself was
helpless?' Jimmy stretched and yawned. "It was something I
remembered from my youth.' At this, Gardan laughed
and the tension in the room lessened. Even Arutha
ventured a half-smile as Jimmy continued. "I was given
into the tutelage of one Father Timothy, a cleric of
Astalon, for a time. Occasionally one boy or another is
allowed to do this. It's a sign the Mockers have great
expectations for the boy,' he said proudly. "I stayed only
to learn my letters and numbers, but along the way I
chanced to pick up a few other bits of knowledge.
'I remembered a discourse on the nature of the gods
Father Timothy had given once - though it had almost
put me to sleep. According to that worthy, there is an
opposition of forces, positive and negative forces that are
sometimes called good and evil. Good cannot cancel
good, nor evil cancel evil. To balk an agent of evil, you
need an agency of good. The High Priestess is counted a
servant of dark powers by most people and could not
hold the creature at bay. I hoped the father could oppose
the creature, as Sung and her servants are seen as being
of "good" demeanour. I really didn't know if it was
possible, but I couldn't see standing around while that
thing chewed up the palace guards one by one.'
Arutha said, (it proved a good guess.' His tone revealed
approval of Jimmy's quick thinking.
A guard came into the room and said, 'Highness, the
priest is recovered and sends word for you. He begs you
to come to his quarters.' Arutha nearly leapt from his
chair and strode out of the chamber with the others close
behind.
For over a century custom had provided that the palace
of the Prince of Krondor contain a temple with a shrine
to each of the gods, so that whoever was a guest, no
matter which of the major deities he worshipped, would
find a place of spiritual comfort close by. The order
seeing to the temple's care would change from time to
time as different advisers to the Prince came and went. It
was Nathan and his acolytes who cared for the temple
under Arutha's administration, as they had during
Erland's. The priest's quarters lay behind the temple,
and Arutha entered through the large, vaulted hall. At
the opposite end of the nave a door could be glimpsed
behind the bema that contained the shrine to the four
greater gods. Arutha strode towards the door, his boots
clacking upon the stone floor as he walked past the
shrines to the lesser gods on either side of the temple. As
he approached the door to Nathan's quarters, Arutha
could see it was open and glimpsed movement inside.
He entered the priest's quarters and Nathan's acolytes
stepped aside. Arutha was struck by the austere look of
the room, nearly a cell without personal property or
decoration. The only nonutilitarian item visible was a
personal statuette of Sung, represented as a lovely young
woman in a long white robe, resting on a small table next
to Nathan's bed.
The priest looked haggard and weak but alert. He lay
propped up on cushions. Nathan's assistant priest hovered
close by, ready to answer any need Nathan might have.
The royal chirurgeon waited beside the bed. He bowed
and said, "There is nothing physically wrong, Highness,
save he is exhausted. Please be brief.' Arutha nodded as
the chirurgeon, followed by all the acolytes, withdrew.
As he left, he motioned for Gardan and the others to
remain outside. Arutha came to Nathan's side.
"How do you fare?'
'I will live, Highness,' he answered weakly.
Arutha cast a quick glance at the door and saw the
alarmed expression on Gardan's face. It confirmed
Arutha's impression that Nathan's ordeal had left him
changed. Softly Arutha said, 'You will do more than just
live, Nathan. You'll be back to your old self soon.'
'I have lived through a horror no man should have to
face, Highness. So you may understand, I must share a
confidence with you.' He nodded towards the door.
The assistant priest closed the door and returned to
Nathan's bedside. Nathan said, "I must now tell you
something not commonly known outside the temple,
Highness. I take great responsibility upon myself to do
this, but I judge it imperative.'
Arutha leaned forward the better to hear the tired
priest's faint words. Nathan said, There is an order to
things, Arutha, a balance imposed by Ishap, the One
Above All. The greater gods rule through the lesser gods,
who are served by the priesthoods. Each order has its
mission. An order may seem to be in opposition to
another, but the higher truth is that all orders have a
place in the scheme of things. Even those in the temples
who are of lower rank are kept ignorant of this higher
order. It is the reason for occasional conflicts erupting
between temples. My discomfort at the High Priestess's
rites last night was as much for the benefit of my acolytes
as from any true distaste. What an individual is capable
of understanding determines how much of the truth is
revealed to him by the temples. Many need the simple
concepts of good and evil, light and dark, to govern their
daily lives. You are not such a one.
'I have trained in the Following of the Single Path, the
order I am best suited for by my nature. But as do all
others who have reached my rank. I know well the nature
and manifestations of the other gods and goddesses. What
appeared in that room last night was nothing I have ever
known . '
Arutha seemed lost. 'What do you mean?'
'As I battled against the force that drove the moredhel
I' could sense something of its nature. It is something
alien, dark and dread, something without mercy. It rages
and it seeks to dominate or destroy. Even those gods
called dark, lims-Kragma and Guts-wa, are not truly evil
when the truth is understood. But this thing is a blotting
out of the light of hope. It is despair incarnate.'
The assistant priest indicated it was time for Arutha to
leave. As he moved towards the door, Nathan called out.
.Wait, you must understand something more. it left, not
because I had bested it, but because I had robbed it of
the servant it inhabited. It had no physical means of
continuing the attack. I only defeated its agent. It . . .
revealed something of itself in that moment. 'it is not
ready yet to face my Lady of the One Path, but it holds
her and the other gods in contempt.' His face revealed
his alarm. 'Arutha, it feels contempt for the gods!' nathan
sat up, his hand outstretched, and Arutha returned and
took it. 'Highness, it is a force that deems itself supreme.
It hates and it rages and it means to destroy any who
oppose it. If - '
Arutha said, 'Softly, Nathan.'
The priest nodded and lay back. sSeek greater wisdom
than mine, Arutha. For one other thing did I sense. This
foe. this encompassing darkness. is growing in strength.'
Arutha said. 'Sleep, nathan. Let this all become just
another bad dream.' He nodded to the assistant priest
and left the room. As he passed the royal chirurgeon, he
' Said, 'Aid him,' a plea more than a command.
Hours went by as Arutha awaited word of the High
Priestess of lims-Kragma. He sat alone, while Jimmy
slept on a low settee. Gardan was off seeing to the
deployment of his guards. Volney was busy with running
the Principality, as Arutha was preoccupied with the
mysteries of the previous night. He had decided against
informing Lyam of exactly what had occurred until the
King was in Krondor. As he had observed before, with
Lyam's retinue numbering in excess of a hundred soldiers,
it would take something in the order of a small army to
imperil him. Arutha paused for a moment in his deliberation to
study Jimmy. He looked still a child as he breathed
slowly. He had laughed off the severity of his wound, but
once things had finally quieted down, he had fallen asleep
almost instantly. Gardan had gently lifted him onto the
couch. Arutha shook his head slightly. The youth was a
common criminal, a parasite upon society who had not
worked an honest day's labour in his young life. Not
much past fourteen or fifteen, he was a braggart, a liar,
and a thief, but while he might be many things, he was
still a friend. Arutha sighed and wondered what to do
about the boy. A court page arrived with a message from the High
Priestess, requesting Arutha's presence at once. The
Prince rose quietly, so as not to awaken Jimmy, and
followed the page to where the High Priestess was being
cared for by her healers. Arutha's guards waited outside
the suite and temple guards stood inside the door, a
concession Arutha had granted when requested by the
priest who had come from the temple. The priest greeted
Arutha coolly, as if Arutha somehow bore the responsibility
for his mistress's injury. He led Arutha into the
sleeping chamber, where a priestess attended the leader
of their temple. Arutha was shocked by the appearance of the high
Priestess. She lay propped up by a pile of bolsters. her
pale blond hair framing a face drained of colour, as if the
icy blue of winter had suffused her features. She looked
as if she had aged twenty years in a day. But as she turned
her gaze upon Arutha, there was still an aura of power
about her.
'Have you recovered, madam?' Arutha's tone showed
concern as he inclined his head towards her.
'My mistress has work for me yet, Highness. I will not
join her for some time.'
'I am pleased to hear that news. I have come as you
required.'
The woman drew herself upright, until she sat with her
back against the pillows. Without conscious thought she
brushed back her nearly white hair, and Arutha could see
that despite the grim demeanour the High Priestess was a
woman of unusual beauty, albeit a beauty without a hint
of softness. In a voice still strained, the priestess said,
'Arutha conDoin, there is peril to our Kingdom, and
more. In the realm of the Mistress of Death. only one
stands higher than I; she is our Mother Matriarch in
Rillanon. Other than herself. none should challenge my
power in the domain of death. But now there comes
something that challenges the very goddess herself. something
that while still weak, while still learning its powers,
can overcome my control over one in my mistress's realm.
'Have you any understanding of the importance of my
words? It is as if a baby fresh from her mother's teat has
come to your palace, nay, the palace of your brother the
King, and turned his retinue, his guards, even the very
people against him, rendering him helpless in the very
seat of his power. That is what we face. And it grows. As
we stand speaking, it grows in strength and rage. And it
is' ancient. . . .' Her eyes grew wide, and suddenly Arutha
saw a hint of madness'. 'it is both new and old . . I don't
understand . '
Arutha nodded towards the healer and turned to the
priest. The priest indicated the door and Arutha started
to leave. As he reached the door, the High Priestess's
voice broke into sobbing. When they reached the outer room, the priest said,
'Highness, I am Julian, Chief Priest of the Inner Circle.
I've sent word to our mother'temple in Rillanon of what
has happened here. I. . .' He appeared troubled by what
he was about to say. Most likely I will be High Priest of
lims-Kragma within a few months' time. We shall care
for her,' he said, facing the closed door, "but she will
never again be able to guide us in our mistress's service.'
He returned his attention to Arutha. 'I have heard from
the temple guards of what occurred last night, and I have
just heard the High Priestess's words. If the temple can
help, we will.' Arutha considered the man's words. It was usual for a
priest of one of the orders to be numbered among the
councillors of the nobility. There were too many matters
of mystic importance to be faced for the nobility to be
without spiritual guidance. That was why Arutha's father
had been the first to include a magician in his company of
advisers. But active cooperation between temple and
temporal authority, between ruling bodies themselves
was rare. Finally Arutha said, 'My thanks, Julian. When
we have a better sense of what we are dealing with, we
shall seek out your wisdom. I have just come to understand
that my view of the world is somewhat narrow. I
expect you will provide valued assistance.'
The priest bowed his head. As Arutha made to leave,
he said, 'Highness?' Arutha looked back' to see a concerned expression on
the priest's face. "Yes?')
'Find whatever this thing is, Highness. Seek it out, and
destroy it utterly.' Arutha could only nod. He made his way back to his
chamber. Entering, he sat quietly, lest he disturb Jimmy,
who still lay sleeping upon the settee. Arutha noticed
that a plate of fruit and cheese and a decanter of chilled
wine had been placed upon the table for him. Realizing
he had had nothing to eat all day, he poured himself a
glass of wine and cut a wedge of cheese. then sat down
again. He put his boots on the table and leaned back,
letting his mind wander. The fatigue of two nights with
little sleep washed over him, but his mind was too caught
up in the events of the last two days to let sleep be
considered for even a moment. Some supernatural agent
was loose in his realm, some magic thing that threw fear
into priests of two of the most powerful temples in the
Kingdom. Lyam would arrive in less than a week. Nearly
every noble in the Kingdom would be in Krondor for the
wedding. In his city. And he could think of nothing he
could do to guarantee their safety.
Arutha sat for an hour, his mind miles away as he
absently ate and drank. He was a man who often
descended into dark brooding when left alone, but when
given a problem he never ceased to work on it, to attack
it from every possible side, to worry it, tossing it about,
as a terrier does a rat. He conjured up dozens of possible
approaches to the problem and constantly re-examined
every shred of information he had. Finally, after discarding
a dozen plans. he knew what he must do. He took his
feet off the table and grabbed a ripe apple off the dish
before him.
.Jimmy.' he shouted, and the boy thief was instantly
awake ,'years of dangerous living having bred the habit of
light sleeping. Arutha threw the apple at the boy and
with astonishing speed he sat up and caught the fruit
scant inches from his face. Arutha could understand how
he had come to be known as 'the Hand'.
.What?' inquired the boy as he bit into the fruit.
'I need you to carry a message to your master.' Jimmy
stopped in mid-bite. 'I need you to arrange
a meeting between myself and the Upright Man."
Jimmy's eyes widened in utter disbelief.

Again thick fog had rolled in off the Bitter Sea to blanket
Krondor in a deep mantle of haze. Two figures moved
quickly past the few taverns still open for business.
Arutha followed as Jimmy led him through the city,
passing out of the Merchants' Quarter into rougher
environs, 'until they were deep within the heart of the
Poor quarter. Then a quick turn down an alley and they
stood before a dead end. Emerging from the shadows,
three men appeared as if by magic. Arutha had his rapier
out in an instant, but Jimmy only said, 'We are pilgrims
who seek guidance.'
'Pilgrims, I am the guide.' came the answer from the
foremost man. 'Now, tell your friend to put up his toad
sticker or we'll deliver him up in a sack.'
If the men knew Arutha's identity, they were giving no
sign. Arutha slowly put away his sword. The other two
men came forward, holding out blindfolds. Arutha said,
'What business is this?'
'This is the way you will travel,' answered the spokesman. '
if you refuse, you will go not one step farther.'
Arutha fought down irritation and nodded, once. The
men came forward and Arutha saw Jimmy blindfolded
an instant before' he was roughly denied light himself.
Struggling against the urge to pull the blindfold away,
Arutha heard the man speak. 'You will both be led from
here to another place, where others will come to guide
you. You may be passed along through many hands
before you reach your destination, so do not become
alarmed should you hear unexpected voices in the dark. I
do not know what your ultimate destination is, for I do
not need to know. I also do not know who you are, man,)
but orders have come down from one most highly placed
that you are to be led quickly and delivered unharmed.
But be warned: remove your blindfold only at grave risk.
You may not know where you are from this moment
henceforth.' Arutha felt a rope being tied around his
waist and heard the speaker say, 'Hold tightly to the rope
and keep a sure foot, we travel at good pace.'
Without further word, Arutha was jerked around and
led off into the night.

For more than an hour, or so it seemed to the Prince, he
had been led about the streets of Krondor. He had twice
stumbled and had bruises to show for the casual care
given by his guides. At least three times he had changed
guides, so he had no idea whom he would see when the
blindfold was removed. But at last he climbed a flight of
stairs. He heard several doors open and shut before
strong hands forced him to sit. At last the blindfold was
removed and Arutha blinked as he was dazzled by the
light. Arrayed along a table was a series of lanterns, with a
polished reflector behind each, all turned to face him.
Each cast a brilliant illumination into the Prince's eyes,
preventing him from seeing anyone who stood behind
'.that table.
Arutha looked to his right and saw Jimmy sitting upon
another stool. After a long moment a deep voice rumbled
from behind the lights. 'Greetings, Prince of Krondor.'

Arutha squinted against the light, but could catch no glimpse of who spoke from
behind the glare. 'Am I speaking to the Upright Man?'
A long pause preceded the answer.
'Be satisfied that I am empowered to reach any understanding you may
desire. I speak with his voice.'
Arutha considered for a moment. "Very well. I seek an
alliance. '
From behind the glare came a deep chuckle. 'What
would the Prince of cronder need of the Upright Man's
aid?'
'I seek to learn the secrets of the Guild of Death.'
A long silence followed on the heels of this statement.
Arutha couldn't decide if the speaker was consulting
another person or simply thinking. Then the voice behind
the lanterns said, 'Remove the boy and hold him outside.'
Two men appeared from out of the dark and roughly
grabbed Jimmy, hauling him from the room. When he
was gone, the voice said, "The Nighthawks are   a source
of concern for the Upright Man, Prince of Krondor. They
trespass upon the Thieves' Highway and their black
murders stir up the populace, casting unwelcome light
upon the Mockers' many activities. In short, they are bad
for business. It would serve us to see them ended, but
what cause have you beyond that which normally occupies
a ruler when his subjects are being wantonly murdered in
their sleep?'
'They pose a threat to my brother and myself.'
Again there was a long silence. 'Then they set their
sights high. Still, royalty often needs killing as much as
the commons, and a man must earn a living howsoever
he may, even though he be an assassin.'
'it should be apparent to you,' said Arutha dryly, 'that
murdering Princes would be especially. bad for business.
The Mockers would find things a little cramped working
in a' city under martial law.'
"This is true. Name your bargain.'
'I ask no bargain. I demand cooperation. I need information.
I wish to know where lies the heart of the
Nighthawks. '
'Altruism accrues little benefit to those lying cold in
the gutter. The arm of the Guild of Death is long.'
'No longer than mine,' said Arutha in a voice devoid of
humour. 'I can see that the activities of the Mockers
suffer greatly. You know as well as I what would happen
to the Mockers should the Prince of Krondor declare war
upon your guild.'
'There is little profit in such contention between the
guild and Your Highness.'
Arutha leaned forward, his dark eyes gleaming from
the brilliant lights. Slowly, biting off each word, he said,
'I have no need of profit.'
A moment of silence was followed by a deep sigh.
'Yes, there is that,' said the voice thoughtfully. Then it
chuckled. 'That is one of the advantages to inheriting
one's position. It would prove troublesome to govern a
guild of starving thieves. Very well, Arutha of Krondor,
but for this risk the guild needs indemnity. You've shown
the stick, now what of the carrot?'
'Name your price.' Arutha sat back.
'Understand this: the Upright Man is sympathetic to
Your Highness regarding the problems posed by the
Guild of Death. The Nighthawks are not to be endured.
They must be eliminated root and branch. But many
risks are involved, and great expense will be incurred
this will be a costly venture.'
'Your price?' Arutha repeated flatly.
'For the risk involved to all should we fail, ten thousand
golden sovereigns.'
'That would put a large hole in the royal treasury."
"True, but consider the alternatives.'
'We have a bargain.'
'i shall provide the Upright Man's instructions as to the
means of payment later,' the voice said with a hint of
humour in it. 'Now there is another matter.'
'What is that?' said Arutha.
'Young Jimmy the Hand has broken oath with the
Mockers and his life is forfeit. He shall die within the
hour. '

Without thinking, Arutha began to rise. Strong hands
pushed him down from behind as a large thief stepped
out of the darkness. He simply shook his ' head in the
negative.
'We would never think of returning you to the palace
in less salubrious condition than that in which you
arrived,' said the voice behind the lights, "but draw a
weapon in this room and you will be delivered to the
palace gate in a box and we will deal then with the
consequences. '
'But Jimmy - '
'Broke oath!' interrupted the voice. 'He was honourbound
to report the whereabouts of the Nighthawk when
he saw him. As he was honour-bound to tell of Laughing
Jack's treachery. Yes, Highness, we know of these things.
Jimmy betrayed the guild to carry word to you first.
There are certain matters that can be forgiven because of
age, but these actions cannot.'
'i'll not stand by and allow Jimmy to be murdered.'
'Then listen, Prince of Krondor, for I have a story to
tell. Once the Upright Man lay with a woman of the
streets, as he had with hundreds of others, but this whore
bore him a son. This is a certainty: Jimmy the Hand is
the Upright Man's son, though he is ignorant of his
paternity. This presents the Upright Man with something
of a quandary. If he is to obey the laws he has made, he
must order the death of his own son. But should he not
he will lose credibility with those who serve him. An
unpleasant choice. Already the Guild of Thieves is in
turmoil from jack's being shown as an agent of the
Nighthawks. Trust is a thin enough commodity at most
times, it is nearly nonexistent now. Can you think of
another way?'
Arutha smiled, for he knew another way. 'in times not
far past, it was not unheard of to buy pardon. Name your
price. '
'For treason? No less than another ten thousand gold
sovereigns.'
Arutha shook his head. His treasury would be gutted.
Still, Jimmy must have known the risks of betraying the
Mockers to bring him warning, and that was worth much.
'Done,' said Arutha sourly.
'Then you must keep the boy with you, Prince of
Krondor, for he'll never be one with the Mockers again,
though we will not attempt to harm him . . . unless he
again transgresses against us. Then we shall deal with
him as we would any freebooter. Harshly.'
Arutha rose. 'is our business then done?'
'Except for one last thing.'
'Yes?'
"Also in times not far past, it was not unheard of to
buy a patent of nobility for a price in gold. What price
would you ask of a father to have his son named Squire
of the Prince's court?'
Arutha laughed, suddenly understanding the course of
negotiations. 'Twenty thousand golden sovereigns.'
'Done. the UPright Man is fond of Jimmy, though he
has other bastards around, Jimmy is special. The Upright
Man wishes Jimmy to remain ignorant of the relationship,
but he will be pleased to think his son shall have a
brighter future for this night's negotiations.'
'He will be placed within my service, without knowing
who his father is. Shall we meet again?'
'i think not, Prince of Krondor. The Upright Man
guards his identity jealously, and even to come close to
one who' speaks with his voice brings him dangers. But
we will carry clear messages to you when we know' where
hide the Nighthawks. And we will welcome news of their
obliteration. '

Jimmy sat nervously. For over three hours Arutha had
been closeted with Gardan, Volney, and Laurie, as well
as other members of his private staff. Jimmy had been
invited to remain in a room set aside for his use. , The
presence of two guards at the door and two more below
the balcony outside his window gave ample support to
the notion that he was, for whatever reason, a prisoner.
Jimmy had little doubt he could leave undetected during
the night if he had been in fit condition, but after the
events of the last few days he felt abused. Also, he was at
something of a loss to understand being returned to
the palace with the Prince. The boy thief was uneasy
Something in his life had changed and he wasn't sure
what, or why. The door to the room opened and a guard sergeant
stuck his head in, waving to Jimmy to come. 'His Highness
wants you, boy.' Jimmy quickly followed the soldier down
the hall to the long passage to the council chambers.
Arutha looked up from reading something. About the
table sat Gardan, Laurie, and some other men Jimmy
didn't know, while Earl Volney stood near the door.
~Jimmy, I have something for you here.' Jimmy simply
looked around the room, not knowing what to say.
Arutha said, "This is a royal patent naming You Squire to
the Prince's court.') Jimmy was speechless, his eyes wide. Laurie chuckled
at his reaction, while Gardan grinned. Finally Jimmy
found his voice. "This is a jest, right?' When Arutha
shook his head, the boy said, 'But . . . me, a squire?'
Arutha replied, 'You have saved my life and you are to
be rewarded.'
Jimmy said, "But, Highness, I . . . thank you, but . ~ .
there's the matter of my oath to the Mockers.'
Arutha leaned forward. 'That matter has been disposed
of, Squire. You are no longer a member of the Guild of
Thieves. The Upright Man has agreed. It is done.'
Jimmy felt trapped. He had never taken much pleasure
in being a thief, but he had taken great pleasure in being
a very good thief. What appealed to him was the chance
to prove himself at every turn, to show all that Jimmy the
Hand was the best thief in the guild . . . or at least would
be someday. But now he was to be bound to the Prince'S
household, and with the office came duties. And if the
Upright Man had agreed, Jimmy was forever denied
access to the society of the streets.
Seeing the boy's lack of enthusiasm, Laurie said, 'May
I, Highness?'
Arutha permitted, and the singer came over to place a
hand on the boy's shoulder. 'Jimmy, His Highness is
simply keeping your head above water, literally. He had
to bargain for your life. If he had not, you'd be floating
in the harbour this hour. The Upright Man knew you'd
broken oath with the guild.'
Jimmy visibly sagged and Laurie squeezed his shoulder
reassuringly. The boy had always thought himself somehow
above the rules, free of the responsibilities that
bound others. Jimmy had never known why he had been
granted special consideration so many times, while others
were forced to pay their way, but now he knew that he
had stretched privilege too far once too often. There was
no doubt in the boy's mind that the singer told the truth,
and conflicting emotions . surged up within him as he
considered how close to being murdered he had come.
Laurie said, 'Palace life isn't so bad. The building's
warm, your clothing'll be clean, and there's ample food.
Besides, there'll be plenty to hold your interest.' He
looked at Arutha and added dryly,) "Especially of late.'
Jimmy nodded and Laurie led him around the table.
Jimmy was instructed to kneel. The Earl quickly read the
patent. 'To all within our demesne: whereas the youth
Jimmy. an orphan of the city of Krondor, has rendered
worthy service in preventing injury to the royal person of
the Prince of Krondor, and: Whereas the youth Jimmy is
considered to hold us forever in his debt, It is my wish
that he be known to all in the realm as our beloved and
loyal servant. and it is furthermore wished that he be
given a place in the court of Krondor, with the rank of
Squire, with all rights( and privileges pertaining thereunto.
Furthermore let it be known that the title to the estate of
Haverford on the River Welandel is conferred upon him
and his progeny as long as they shall live, to have and to
hold, with servants and properties thereupon. Title to
this estate shall be held by the crown until the day of his
majority. Set this day by my hand and seal, Arutha
conDoin, Prince of Krondor; Knight-Marshal of the Western
Realm and of the King's Armies of the West, Heir
Apparent to the throne of Rillanon.' Volney looked at
Jimmy. 'Do you accept this charge?' Jimmy said,
'Yes.' Volney rolled up the parchment and
handed it to the boy. That, apparently, was all that was
needed to turn a thief into a squire.
The boy didn't know where Haverford on the River
Welandel was, but land meant income, and immediately
he brightened. As he stepped away, he studied Arutha,
who was obviously preoccupied. Chance had twice thrown
them together, and twice Arutha had proved the only
person who hadn't wanted anything from him. Even his
few friends among the Mockers had tried to gain advantage
over the boy at least once until he had shown that to
be a difficult task. Jimmy found his relationship with
Arutha a novel one. As Arutha read some papers silently ,
Jimmy decided that if fate was again taking a hand, he'd
just as soon stay with the Prince and his lively bunch as
go anywhere else he could think of. Besides, he would
have income and comfort as long as Arutha lived, though
this, he thought sombrely, might prove a bit of a problem.
While Jimmy glanced at his patent, Arutha in turn
studied him. He was a street boy: tough, resilient,
resourceful, and occasionally ruthless. Arutha smiled to
himself. He'd get along just fine in court.
Jimmy rolled up the paper as Arutha said, 'Your former
master works with alacrity.' To the entire group he said.
'Here I have his word that he has nearly uncovered the
nest of the Nighthawks. He states he will send a message
at any moment, and he regrets he must withhold any
direct aid in stamping them out. Jimmy, what do you
think of this?'
Jimmy grinned. 'The Upright Man knows how to play.
Should you destroy the Nighthawks, business returns to
normal. Should you fail, there is no suspicion he took a
hand in your attempt. He cannot lose.' In more serious
tones he added, 'He also worries about additional infiltration
of the Mockers. Should that be the case, any
Mocker participation places the raid in jeopardy.'
Arutha took the boy's meaning. 'it is come to that
Serious a pass?'
'Most likely', Highness. There are no more than three
or four men with access to the' Upright Man himself.
These are the only ones he can fully trust. I would guess
he has a few agents of his own outside the guild, unknown
to any but his most trusted aides, perhaps not even to
them. He must be using these to ferret out the Nighthawks.
There are over two hundred Mockers and twice
that number of beggars and urchins, any of whom could
be eyes and ears for the Guild of Death.'
Arutha smiled his crooked smile. Volney said, 'You
have wits, Squire James. You should prove a boon to His
Highness's court.'
Jimmy looked as if something tasted bad as he muttered,
"Squire James?'
Arutha seemed unaware of Jimmy's sour tone. "We
could all do with some rest. Until we hear from the
Upright Man, the best we can do is recover from the
rigours of the last few days.' He rose. 'I bid you all good
night.'
Arutha quickly left the chamber and Volney gathered
up the papers from the conference table and hurried
along on his own errands. Laurie said to Jimmy, 'Well,
 i'd better take you in tow, youngster. Someone should
teach you a thing or two about quality folk.'
Gardan came over to them. 'Then the boy is as good as
damned forever to be an embarrassment to the Prince.'
Laurie sighed. 'it just shows you,)' he rejoined to
Jimmy, 'you can put a badge of rank on the man, but
once a barracks sweeper, always a barracks sweeper.'
'Barracks sweeper!' snapped Gardan, mock outrage on
his dark face. "Singer, I'll have you know I come from a
long line of heroes . . .'
Jimmy sighed in resignation as he followed the two
bickering men from the hall. On the whole, life had been
simpler a week ago. He tried to put on a brighter
expression, but at best he resembled a cat who had fallen
into a barrel of cream, unsure of whether to lap it up or
swim for his life.

5

Obliteration

Arutha studied the old thief.
The Upright Man's messenger had waited while the
Prince read the missive. Now the Prince's eyes were upon
him. 'Know you the contents of this?'
'To the specifics, no. He who gave it to me was explicit
in instructions."the old thief, now robbed of his agility
by age, rubbed absently at his bald pate as he stood
before Arutha. 'He said to tell you the boy could bring
you easily to the place named within, Your Highness. He
also said to tell you that word has been passed regarding
the boy, and the Mockers consider the matter at a close.'
The man cast a brief glance at Jimmy and winked. Jimmy,
who was standing off to one side. breathed a silent sigh

of relief at hearing that. The wink told him that while
Jimmy would never be a Mocker again, he at least was
not denied the streets of the city and that old Alvarny the
Quick was still a friend. Arutha said, 'Tell your master I
am pleased with this swift resolution. Tell him we shall
have an end to this matter tonight. He will understand.'
Arutha waved for a guard to escort Alvarny from the
hall and turned to Gardan. 'Select a company of your
most trusted men and any Pathfinders still in the garrison
-Any who are new to our service shall be passed over. By
word of mouth, tell each to muster at the postern gate
beginning at sundown. By ones and twos I want them
sent into the city, using varied routes and with sharp eyes
for signs they are being followed. Let them wander and
dine, as if they were off duty, though any drinking should
be only sham. By midnight they are all to gather at the
Rainbow Parrot.' Gardan saluted and left.
When Arutha and the boy were alone, the Prince said,
'You must think I've dealt harshly with you.'
Jimmy's face showed his surprise. 'No Highness. I
thought it a bit strange, is all. If anything, I owe you my
life . '
'I worried you'd resent being taken from the only
family you knew.' Jimmy shrugged off the remark. 'And
as for owing a life . . .' He leaned back, finger against his
cheek as he smiled. 'We are even, Squire James, for had
you not acted quickly the other night I'd be shorter by a
head.'
They both smiled at that. Jimmy said, "If we're even,
why the office?'
Arutha remembered his pledge to the Upright Man.
'Count it a means of keeping an eye upon you. You are
free to come and go, as long as you discharge your duties
as a squire, but should I find the gold cups missing from
the pantry. I'll personally drag you down to the dungeon.'
Jimmy again laughed, but Arutha's voice took on a more


sombre tone. 'Also, there's the matter of someone's foiling an assassin
upon the roof of a certain fuller's house

earlier this week. And you've never said why you chose
to come to me with news of that Nighthawk rather than
report it as you were warranted to do.'
Jimmy looked at Arutha, his gaze older by years than
his boyish face. Finally he said, 'The night you escaped
from Krondor with the Princess, I got caught with a full
company of Black Guy's horsemen on the docks between
me and freedom. You threw me your sword before you
knew you'd be safely away. And when we were closeted
in the safe house, you taught me swordplay. You were
always as fairlly spoken to me as you were to any other.
He paused for a moment. "You treated me like a friend
i've . . . I've had few friends, Highness.'
Arutha indicated understanding. ' i also count few aS
true friends - 'my family, the magicians Pug and Kulgan,
Father Tully, and Gardan.' His expression turned wry.
'Laurie has shown himself more than a simple courtier
and I think he may prove a friend. I'll even go so far as
to name that pirate Amos Trash a true friend. Now, if
Amos can be the friend of the Prince of Krondor, why
not Jimmy the Hand?' Jimmy grinned and there was a hint of moisture in his

eyes. 'Why not indeed?' He swallowed hard and raised
his mask again. 'Whatever happened to Amos?'
Arutha sat back. 'The last I saw of him, he was stealing
the King's ship.' Jimmy guffawed. 'We've not had word
of him since. I'd give much to have that cut-throat by my
Side this night.' Jimmy lost his smile. 'I hate to bring this up, but what

if we run into another of those damn things that won't
die?' 'Nathan thinks it unlikely. He thinks it happened only

because the priestess called that thing back. Besides, I
can't wait upon the temples' pleasure to act. Only that
death priest, Julian, has offered to help.'
'And we've seen how much help those who serve lims-
Kragma can provide,' Jimmy added dryly. "Let's hope
Father Nathan knows of what he speaks.'
Arutha rose. 'Come, let's get what rest we may, for the
night should provide bloody work."

Throughout the night bands of soldiers, dressed in the
common garb of mercenaries, had been wending their
way through the streets of Krondor, passing one another
without a flicker of acknowledgment, until at three hours
after midnight over a hundred men were in the Rainbow
Parrot. Several were dispensing uniform tabards from
large sacks, so the soldiers would again be in the Prince's
colours during the raid.
Jimmy entered in the company of two men dressed in
simple foresters' garb, members of Arutha's elite company
of army scouts, the Royal Pathfinders. The senior
Pathfinder saluted. "This youngster has the eyes of a cat,
Highness. He spotted our men being followed to the inn
three times.'
When Arutha looked at them questioningly, Jimmy
said. 'Two of them were beggars known to me, and they
were easy to intercept and chase off, but the third . . . It
may have been he simply followed to see if something
was up. Anyway, when we blocked his way down a street
subtly, you may be sure - he simply moved off in
another direction. It could have been nothing.'
'it also could have been something,' Arutha said. "Still,
there is nothing more we can do. Even if the Nighthawks
know we are doing something, they will not know what.
Look you here,' he said to Jimmy, pointing to a map on a
table before him. 'This was given to me by the royal architect. It is old
but he thinks it a fair accounting of


the sewers.'
Jimmy studied it for a moment. 'Perhaps a score of
years ago it was.' He pointed to one spot on the map and
another. "Here there's been a collapse of a wall, and
while the sewage still flows, the passage is too narrow for
a man. And here there is a new tunnel, dug by a tanner
requiring a more rapid disposal of his waste.' Jimmy
studied the map a bit longer, then said, 'is there a
quill and ink, or charcoal?' A piece of charcoal was
forthcoming and Jimmy made marks upon the map.
'Friend Lucas has a slip-me-out to the sewers in his
basement.' Behind the bar the old owner's mouth dropped at

hearing that piece of news. 'What? How'd you know?'
Jimmy grinned. 'The rooftops aren't the only Thieves
Highway. From here' he pointed at the map - 'compan-
ies of men can move to these two points. The exits from
the basement of the Nighthawks' stronghold are cleverly
located. Each comes out in a tunnel not directly connected
with the others. The doors may be only scant yards apart,
but it's yards of solid walls of brick and stone, with miles
of twisting sewers to travel, to gain one from the next. It
would take an hour to find your way from one exit to
another. It's this third one that's the problem. It empties
out near a large landing with a dozen tunnels to flee
down, too many to block.' Gardan, who was looking over the boy's shoulder,

said, 'Which means a coordinated assault. Jimmy, can
you hear if someone is breaking in one of the doors and
you're at the other?"
Jimmy said, 'I should think. If you slip someone to the
top of the stairs, for certain. Especially this time of night.
You'd be surprised how many little noises filter down the
streets during the day, but at night . . .'
Arutha said to the two Pathfinders, 'Can you find these
locations from this map?' Each nodded. 'Good. Each of
you will guide a third of the men to one of these two
entrances. The other third will come with Gardan and
myself. Jimmy will guide us. You will position men but
not enter the basement of that building unless you are
discovered first or you hear our party assaulting those
within. Then come with all speed. Gardan, those on the
streets should be in position. They have their orders?'
Gardan said, "Each has been instructed. At first hint of
trouble, no one is allowed to leave that building unless he
wears your tabard and is known by sight. I have thirty
archers in place on the rooftops on all sides to discourage
any seeking quick exit. A herald with a trumpet will
sound alarm and two companies of horsemen will exit the
palace at the bugle. They will reach us within five minutes
Any in the streets not of our company will be ridden
down, that is the order.'
Arutha quickly put on a tabard and tossed one each to
Jimmy and Laurie. When all were wearing the Prince's
purple and black, Arutha said, 'it is time.' The Pathfinders
led the first two groups into the cellar below the inn.
Then it was time for Jimmy to lead the Prince's group.
He took them to the slip-me-out behind a false cask in
the wall and led them down the narrow stairs to the
sewers. The stench caused a few soldiers to gasp and
utter soft oaths, but a single word from Gardan restored
order to the ranks. Several shuttered lanterns were lit.
Jimmy motioned for a single line to be formed, and led
the Prince's raiders off towards the Merchants' Quarter
of the city.
After nearly a half hour walking, past slowly moving
channels carrying waste and garbage towards the harbour,
they found themselves approaching the large landing.
Arutha ordered the lanterns shuttered. Jimmy went forward.
Arutha tried to follow his movements but was
astonished as the darkness seemed to swallow him uP.
Arutha strained to hear him, but Jimmy was noiseless.
For the waiting soldiers. the strangest thing about the
sewers was the stillness, broken only by the sound of
slow water lapping. Each soldier had taken care to muffle
all armour and weapons, so should there be a Nighthawk
lookout he wouldn't be alerted.
Jimmy returned after a moment and signalled that a

single guard stood at the bottom of the stairs to the
building. With his mouth near Arutha's ear he whispered,
'You'll never get one of your men close enough before
the guard gives alarm. I'm the only one who stands a
chance. Just come running when you hear the scuffle
begin.' Jimmy pulled his dirk out of his boot and slipped away.

Suddenly there was a painful grunt and Arutha and his
men were off, all thoughts of silence discarded. The
Prince was the first to reach the boy, who struggled with
a powerful guard. The youth had come up behind the
man and had leapt and grabbed him around the throat,
but had only wounded him with the dirk, which now lay
upon the stones. The man was nearly blue from being
choked, but had tried to smash Jimmy against the wall.
Arutha ended the struggle with a single thrust of his
blade and the man slipped silently to the stones. Jimmy let
go and smiled weakly. He had taken a terrible battering.
Arutha whispered, 'Stay here,)' to him. then signalled his
men to follow. Ignoring his promise to Volney to wait behind while

Gardan led the assault, Arutha silently hurried up the
stairs. He halted before a wooden door with a single
sliding latch, placed his ear next to it, and listened.
Muffled voices from the other side caused him to raise his
hand in warning. Gardan and the others slowed their
approach. Arutha quietly moved the door's latch and pushed

gently. He peeked into a large, well-lit basement. Sitting
around three tables were about a dozen armed men.
Several were tending weapons and armour. The scene
was more reminiscent of a soldiers' commons than a
basement. What Arutha found more incredible was that
this basement was located below the most richly
appointed and successful brothel in the city, the House of
Willows, one frequented by most of the rich merchants
and no small portion of the minor nobility of Krondor.
Arutha could well understand how the Nighthawks could
gain access to so much information about the palace and
his own comings and goings. Many a courtier would boast
of his knowledge of some "secret' or other to impress his
whore. It would not have taken more than a chance
mention from someone in the palace that Gardan had
planned to ride out to the east gate to meet the Prince for
the assassin to know Arutha's route that night earlier in
the week.
Abruptly' a figure entered Arutha's view that made the
Prince catch his breath. A moredhel warrior approached
a man who sat oiling a broadsword and spoke 'quietly to
him. The man nodded while the Dark Brother continued
his discourse. Then suddenly he spun. He pointed directly
towards the door and opened his mouth to speak. Arutha
didn't hesitate. He shouted, 'Now!' and charged into the

room.
The basement erupted into a riot of action. Those who
had moments before been sitting idly by now grabbed up
weapons and answered the assault. Others bolted out
doors leading up to the brothel or down to other parts of
the sewers. From above, screams and shouts told of
.customers alarmed by the fleeing assassins. Those who
attempted to leave via the exits to the sewers were quickly
pushed back up the stairs into the cellar by the other
units of Arutha's invading force.
Arutha ducked a blow by the moredhel warrior and
Rapt to the left as soldiers fought their way into the
centre of the room, separating the Prince from the Dark
Brother. The few assassins who stood their ground
charged into Arutha's men with complete disregard for

 their own lives, forcing the soldiers to kill them. The sole

exception was the moredhel , who seemed to be in a
frenzy trying to reach Arutha. Arutha shouted, 'Take
him alive!' The moredhel was soon the only Nighthawk standing

in the room, and he was forced back to the wall and held.
Arutha came up to him. The dark elf locked gazes with
the Prince, naked hatred upon his face. He allowed
himself to be disarmed as Arutha put up his own sword.
Arutha had never been this close to a living moredhel
before. There was no doubt they were elver kin, though
elves tended to be fairer of hair and eyes. As Martin had
remarked more than once, the moredhel were a handsome
race, if one dark of soul. Then, as one soldier bent
to examine the moredhel's boot top for weapons, the
creature kneed the guard in the face, pushed away the
other, and leapt at Arutha. Arutha had barely' an instant
to duck away from hands outstretched for his face. He
moved to his left and saw the moredhel stiffen as Laurie's
blade took him in the chest. The moredhel collapsed to
the floor, but with a final spasm tried to reach out and
claw at Arutha's leg. Laurie kicked the creature's hands,
deflecting the weak clawing motion. 'Look well at the
nails. I saw them gleam as he let himself be disarmed,'
said the singer. Arutha grabbed a wrist and inspected the moredhel's

hand closely. 'Careful how you handle it,' warned Laurie.
Arutha saw tiny needles embedded in the Dark Brother's
nails, each with a dark stain at the end. Laurie said, 'it's
an old whore's trick, though only those with some gold
and a friendly chirurgeon can get it done. If a man tries
to leave without paying or is given to beating his whores,
a simple scratch and the man is no longer a problem.'
Arutha looked at the singer. 'You have my debt.'
'Banath preserve us!'
Arutha and Gardan turned to see that Jimmy had
crossed to a fallen man, fair and well dressed. He was
staring at the dead assassin. 'Golden,' he said softly.
'You knew this man?' asked Arutha.
'He was a Mocker,' said jimmy. 'in my life I would not
have suspected him.'
'is there not a one left alive?' demanded the Prince.
He was in a fury, for his orders had been to capture as
many as possible.
Gardan, who had been taking reports from his men,
said, 'Highness, there were full thirty and five assassins in
this basement and the rooms above. All either fought so
our men had no choice but to kill or turned and slew one
another, then threw themselves upon their own weapons.'
Gardan held out something to the Prince. 'They all wore
these, Highness.' In his hand was an ebony hawk on a
gold chain.
Then there was an abrupt silence, not as if the men
had stopped their movements, but rather as if something
had been heard and all had instantly halted to listen, yet
there was no sound. An odd dampening of sound
occurred, as if a heavy, oppressive presence had entered
the room, and an eerieness descended upon Arutha and
his men for a brief moment. Then a chill fell over the
room. Arutha felt his neck hair rise, as some primordial
dread filled him. Something alien had entered the room,
an unseen but palpable evil. As Arutha turned to say
something to Gardan and the others, a soldier shouted,
'Highness, I think this one is alive. He moved!' he
sounded eager to please his Prince. Then a second soldier
said, 'This one, too!'
Arutha saw the two soldiers lean over the fallen assassins.

All in the basement gasped in horror as one of the
corpses moved, his hand shooting upwards to seize the
kneeling soldier by the throat. The corpse sat up, forcing
the soldier upwards. The terrible wet cracking sound of
the soldier's throat being crushed echoed in the room.
The other corpse sprang upwards, sinking his teeth in the
neck of the second guard, ripping open his throat while
Arutha and his men were rooted in shocked silence. The
first dead assassin tossed away the choking soldier and
turned. Fixing milk-white eyes upon the Prince, the dead
man smiled. As if from a great distance, a voice sounded
from the grinning maw. 'Again we meet, Lord of the
West. Now shall my servants have you, for you have not
brought your meddling priests. Rise, rise, O my children
Rise, and kill!' Around the room the corpses began to twitch and

move and. soldiers gasped and offered prayers to Tith,
the soldiers' god. One, thinking quickly, hacked the head
off the second corpse as it started to rise. The headless
corpse shuddered and fell, but began to rise once more
while the rolling head mouthed silent curses. Like grotesque
marionettes manipulated by a demented puppetear,
the bodies rose, in jerks and spasms. Jimmy, his
vOice almost quavering, said, 'I think we should have
waited on the temples' pleasure.'
Carden shouted, 'Protect the Prince!' and men leapt at
the animated corpses. Like crazed butchers in a cattle
pen, soldiers began madly chopping in all directions.
Gore spattered the walls and all who stood in the room.
but the bodies continued to rise.
Soldiers slipped in the blood and found themselves
overwhelmed by cold, slimy hands that gripped arms and
legs. Some managed throttled cries as dead fingers closed
around their throats or teeth bit hard into their flesh.
Soldiers of the Prince of Krondor hacked and slashed
sending limbs flying through the air, but the hands and
arms only flopped madly about the floor like bleeding fishh
out of water. Arutha felt a tugging at his leg and looked
down to see a severed hand gripping at his ankle, A
frantic kick sent the hand flying across the room to strike
the opposite wall.
Arutha shouted, "Get out and hold closed those doors!'
Soldiers swore as they cut and kicked their way through
the blood and pulped flesh before them. Many of the
soldiers, hardened veterans, were coming close to panic.
Nothing in their experience had prepared them for the
horror they faced in that basement. Each time a body
was knocked down, it would but try to rise once more.
And each time a comrade fell, he stayed down.
Arutha led the way towards the door leading upstairs,
the closest exit. Jimmy and Laurie followed. Arutha
paused to cut apart another rising corpse and Jimmy
dashed past the Prince. Jimmy reached the door first and
swore as he looked up. Stumbling down the stairs towards
them came the corpse of a beautiful woman, wearing
a diaphanous gown, torn half away, with a spreading
bloodstain at the waist. Her blank white eyes fastened on
Arutha at the bottom of the stairs and she shrieked in
delight. Jimmy ducked under a clumsy slash and drove
his shoulder into her bloody stomach, shouting, "Ware
the stairs!' they both went down and he was first to his
feet, scrambling Past her.
Arutha looked back into the basement and saw his
men being pulled down. Gardan and several other soldiers
had reached the safety of the far doors and were attempting
to close them, while stragglers who were frantically
attempting to reach them were being pulled down. A few
valiant men were pushing closed the doors from inside,
ignoring a sure sentence of death. The floor was a sea of
gore. wet and treacherous, and many soldiers slipped and
fell. never to rise again. Detached body parts seemed
somehow to gather together and corpses would stand
once more. Remembering the creature in the palace and
how it had gained in strength as time passed, Arutha
shouted, "Bar the doors!'
Laurie leapt up the

stairs 'and struck at the grinning

whore, once more on her feet. Her blonde head rolled
past Arutha as he raced up the stairs after Jimmy and the
singer. Reaching the ground floor of the House of Willows

Arutha and his companions were greeted with the sight
of soldiers struggling with more animated corpses. The
horse companies had arrived, cleared the streets, and
entered the building. But they, like those below, were
unprepared to fight dead opponents. Outside the main
door several bodies,'impaled with dozens of arrows, were
trying to rise. Each time one would gain its feet, a flight
of bowshafts would strike it from the dark, knocking it
over again. Jimmy glanced around the room and made a leap atop

a table. With an acrobat's spring, he jumped high over a
guard being strangled by a dead Nighthawk and grabbed
at a wall covering. The tapestry held his weight for a
moment, then the room filled with a loud tearing sound
as it ripped free of its fastenings high overhead. Yards of
fine cloth fell about Jimmy, and he quickly disentangled
himself. He grabbed up as much cloth as he could and
dragged the tapestry to the large fireplace in the main
room of the brothel. He dumped it in the fireplace and
then started overturning anything that would burn onto
it. Within minutes flames were spreading out into the
room. Arutha shoved away a corpse and yanked down another

tapestry, which he tossed to Laurie. The singer ducked as
a dead assassin lunged at him, and tangled the corpse in
the fabric. Quickly spinning the dead creature, Laurie
wrapped it in cloth and with a kick sent it stumbling
towards Jimmy. Jimmy leapt aside and let the clothbound
thing stumble into the rapidly spreading flames,
tripping it as it went past. The dead man fell into the
flames and began shrieking in rage.
The heat in the room was becoming unbearable, as was
the choking smoke. Laurie ran to the door and halted
just before the threshold. 'The Prince!' he shouted to the
bowmen atop the surrounding buildings. "The Prince is
coming through!'
"Hurry.' came the answering shout as an arrow knocked
down a rising corpse a few feet away from Laurie.
Arutha and Jimmy came out of the firelit door, followed
by a few coughing soldiers. Arutha shouted, "To me!'
At once a dozen guards were dashing across the street,
past grooms brought along to hold the cavalry mounts.
The stench of blood and burning bodies and the heat
from the fire were causing the horses to nicker and tug at
their reins as the grooms led them away.
When the guards reached Arutha, several picked up
arrow-studded bodies and tossed them through the windows
into the fire. The shrieks of the burning corpses
ruled the night.
A dead Nighthawk stumbled out of the door, its left
side ablaze , its arms outstretched as if to embrace Arutha.
Two soldiers caught at it and hurled it back through the
door into the fire, disregarding the burns they suffered as
a consequence. Arutha moved from the door while soldiers
denied exit to those corpses seeking to flee the inferno.
He crossed the street as the most exclusive brothel in the
city went up in flames. To a soldier he said, 'Send word
to those in the sewers to make sure nothing gets out of
the basement.' The soldier saluted and ran off.
In short order the house was a tower of fire, the
surrounding area lit like day. Neighbouring buildings
spilled their inhabitants into the street as the heat threatened
to ignite the block. Arutha called for the soldiers to
form bucket lines and douse buildings on both sides of
the House of Willows.
Less than a half hour after the blaze began, there came
a loud crash and a billowing explosion of smoke as the
main floor caved in and the building
 collapsed. Laurie

said, 'So much for those things in the basement.'
Arutha's face was set in a grim expression as he said,
"Some good men remained down there.'
Jimmy had stood transfixed by the sight, his face
smudged with soot and blood. Arutha placed his hand
upon the boy's shoulder. 'Again, you did well.'
Jimmy could only nod. Laurie said, 'I need strong
drink. Gods, I'll never get that stench out of my nose.'
Arutha said, 'Let's return to the palace. This night's
work is done.'

6

Reception

jimmy tugged at his collar.
Master of Ceremonies Brian deLacy struck the floor of
the audience hall with his staff and the boy snapped eyes
forward. Ranging from fourteen to eighteen years of age,
the squires of Arutha's court were being instructed upon
the duties they would be performing during the forth
coming celebration of Anita and Arutha's wedding. The
old Master, a slow-speaking, impeccably attired man,
said, 'Squire James, if you can't remain still, we shall
have to find something of an active duty for you, say,)
running messages between the . palace and the outer
billets?' There was a barely audible groan, for the visiting
nobles were forever sending inconsequential notes back
and forth, and the outer billets, where many of them
were to be housed, were as far away as three-quarters of
a mile from the palace proper. Such duty was mainly
nonstop running to and fro for ten hours a day. Master
deLacy turned to the author of the groan and said,
'Squire Paul, perhaps you would care to join squire
James?'
When no answer was forthcoming, he continued. 'Very
well. Those of you who are expecting relatives to attend
should know that all of you will be required to serve such
duties in turn.' With that announcement, all the boys
groaned. swore, and shuffled. Again the staff struck the
wooden floor loudly.
"You're not dukes, earls, and barons
There will simply be too many in the palace for the servants, porters,
and pages to meet every demand.' One or two days' duty will not cause
your death.
Another of the new boys, Squire Locklear, the youngest
son of the Baron of Land's End, said, 'Sir, which of
us will be at the wedding?'
'in time, boy, in time. All of you will be escorting
guests to their places in the great hall and in the banquet
hall. During the ceremony you'll all stand respectfully at
the rear of the great hall, so you'll all get to see the
wedding.'
A page ran into the room and handed the Master a
note, then dashed off without awaiting a reply. Master
deLacy read the note, then said, "I must make ready for
the reception for the King. All of you know where you
must be today. Meet here again once the King and His
Highness are closeted in council this afternoon. And
anyone who is late will have an extra day of running
messages to the outer ,billets. That is all for now.' As he
walked off, he could be heard to mutter, 'So much to do
and so little time.'
The boys began to move off, but as Jimmy started to
leave, a voice from behind shouted,
'Hey. new boy.' Jimmy turned, as did two others nearby, but the
speaker ,had his eyes locked on Jimmy. Jimmy waited,
knowing full well what was coming. His place in the
oNer of squires was about to be established.
When Jimmy didn't move, Locklear, who had also
halted, pointed to himself and took a hesitant step
towards the speaker. The speaker, a tall, rawboned boy
of sixteen or seventeen years, snapped, 'Not you, boy. I
mean that fellow.' He pointed at Jimmy.
The speaker wore the same brown and green uniform
of the house squires, but it was of better cut than those of
most of the other boys, he obviously had the funds for
personal tailoring. At his belt was a jewelled-hilt dagger,
and his boots were so polished they shone like bright
metal. His hair was straw-coloured and cut cleanly. Knowing
the boy had to be the resident bully, Jimmy rolled hIS
eyes heavenward and sighed. His uniform fit poorly and
his boots hurt and his healing side itched constantly. He
was in an ill-tempered mood to begin with. Best to get
this over with quickly,
he thought. Jimmy walked slowly towards the older boy, who was
called Jerome. He knew Jerome's father was the Squire
of Ludland, a town up the coast from Krondor, a minor
title, but one that garnered wealth for whoever held it.
When Jimmy stood before him, he said, 'Yes?'
With a sneer Jerome said, 'I don't like much about
you, fellow.' Jimmy slowly smiled, then suddenly drove his fist into
Jerome's stomach. The taller boy doubled over and
collapsed onto the floor. He thrashed about for a moment
before, with a grunt, he rose. 'Why . . .' he began, but
stopped, confronted by the sight of Jimmy standing before
him, a dagger in his hand. Jerome reached to his belt for
his own dagger and felt nothing. He looked down, then
frantically about.
'I think this is what you are missing,' Jimmy said
cheerfully, holding out the dagger to reveal the jewelled
hilt. Jerome's eyes widened. Jimmy tossed the dagger
with a flick of his wrist and the blade stood quivering in
the floor between Jerome's boots. 'And the name isn't
fellow". It's Squire James, Prince Arutha's Squire.'
Jimmy quickly exited the hall. After a few yards the
boy called Locklear caught up and fell into step beside
him. 'That was something, Squire James,' said the other
new boy. "Jerome's been making it hard on all the new
boys . '
Jimmy stopped, in no mood for this. 'That's because
you let him, boy.' Locklear stepped away and began to
stammer an apologetic reply. Jimmy held up his hand.
.Wait a moment. I don't mean to be short with you.
have things on my mind. Look, Locklear, isn't it?'
"My friends call me locky.'
Jimmy studied the boy. He was a small lad, still looking
more the baby he was than the man he would be. His
eyes were wide and blue in a face of deep tan, his brown
hair shot through with sungold. Jimmy knew that no
more than a few weeks ago he was playing in the sand
with the common boys at the beach near his father's rural
castle. 'Locky,' said Jimmy, 'when that fool begins to
trouble you, kick him where he lives. That'll sort him out
quick enough. Look, I can't talk now. I've got to go and
meet the King.' Jimmy walked quickly away, leaving an
astonished boy standing in the hall.

Jimmy fidgeted, hating the too tight collar of his new
tunic. One thing Jerome had been good for was to show
him he didn't have to put up with poor tailoring. As soon
as he could, he'd slip out of the palace for a few hours
and visit the three caches he had around the city. He had
enough gold secreted there to tailor himself a dozen new
outfits. This business of being a noble had drawbacks he
hadn't imagined.
"What's the matter with you, boy?'
jimmy looked up and saw the narrow gaze of a tall old
man with dark grey hair. He studied Jimmy with a
practised eye, and Jimmy recognized him as Swordmaster
Fannon, one of Arutha's old companions from Crydee.
who had arrived by ship on the evening tide the night before.
'it's this deuced collar, Swordmaster. And these new
boots hurt my feet as well.'
Fannon nodded. "Well, one must keep up appearances,
discomfort or no. Now, here comes the Prince.'
Arutha walked out of the great doors to the palace, to
stand at the centre of the throng assembled to meet the
King. Broad steps led down to the parade ground. Beyond
the ground, past the large iron gates, the great square of
the city had been cleared of hawkers' stalls. Krondorian
soldiers formed long lines along the route through the
city to the palace, and behind them stood the citizens
eager to catch a glimpse of their King. Lyam's column
had been reported approaching the city only an hour
before, but the citizens had been gathering since before
dawn. Wild cheering heralded the King's approach and Lyam
was the first to ride into view, sitting astride a large
chestnut war-horse, Gardan, as city commander, riding
at his side. Behind them rode Martin and the attending
nobles from the Eastern Realm, a company of Lyam's
Royal Household Guard, and two richly appointed carriages.
Arutha's lancers followed, with the baggage train
bringing up the rear.
As Lyam reined in his mount before the steps, trumpets
sounded flourishes. Grooms rushed to take the King's
horse while Arutha hurried down the steps to meet his
brother. Tradition held the Prince of Krondor to be
second only to the King in rank, and therefore the least
deferential noble in the Kingdom, but all protocol was
forgotten as the two brothers embraced in greeting. The
first to dismount after Lyam was Martin, and in a moment
all three stood reunited.
Jimmy watched as Lyam introduced his riding companions
while the two carriages rolled up to the steps.
The doors to the first carriage opened and Jimmy craned
his neck to see. A stunning young woman alighted and
jimmy gave a silent nod of approval. From the greeting
she gave Arutha, Jimmy guessed her to be the Princess
Carline. Jimmy stole a quick look to where Laurie stood
and saw the singer waiting with open worship on his face.
Jimmy nodded to himself: yes, that was Carline. Behind
her came an old noble, who Jimmy expected would be
Lord Caldric, Duke of Rillanon.
The second carriage's door opened and an older woman
descended. Immediately after her came a familiar figure
and Jimmy smiled. He felt a slight flush at sight of
Princess Anita, for he had once harboured a terrible
infatuation for her. The older woman would be Princess
Alicia, her mother. While they were greeted by Arutha,
Jimmy thought back to when Anita, Arutha, and he,) had
'all hidden together and the boy grinned unselfconsciously.
.What's gotten into you, Squire?'
Jimmy looked up at Swordmaster Fannon again. Covering
his agitation, he said, 'nothing, sir.'
Fannon said, 'Well enough, boy, but you should learn
to bear up under a little discomfort. I mean no disrespect
to your teachers, but you're poorly prepared as squires
go.'
Jimmy nodded, his eyes 'back on Anita. "New to the
trade, sir. Last month I was a thief.'
Fannon's mouth popped open. After a moment Jimmy
took great delight in gently elbowing him in the ribs and
saying, 'The King's coming.'
Fannon's gaze snapped forward, years of military training
overcoming any other distractions. Lyam approached
first, with Arutha at his side. Martin and Carline and the
others followed as befitted their rank. Brian deLacy was
presenting members of Arutha's court to the King, and
Lyam ignored protocol several times to shake hands
vigorously, even embrace several of the people waiting to
be presented. Many of the western lords were men who
had served with him under command of his father
during the Riftwar, and he hadn't seen them since his
coronation. Earl Volney seemed embarrassed when Lyam
placed his hand upon his shoulder and said, 'Well done,
Volney. You've kept the Western Realm in good order
this last year.' These familiarities distressed several of the
nobles, but the crowd loved them, cheering wildly each
time Lyam acted like a man greeting old friends rather
than the King. When the King came up to Fannon, he caught the old
fighter by the shoulders as he began to bow. 'No,' said
Lyam softly enough so that only Fannon, Jimmy, and
Arutha could hear. 'Not from you, my old teacher.' Lyam
engulfed the Swordmaster of Crydee in a bear hug and
then with a laugh said, "Well now, Master Fannon, how
stands my home? How stands Crydee?'
"Well, Majesty', she stands well.' Jimmy noticed a faint
moisture in the old man's eyes.
Then Arutha was saying, 'This young scoundrel is the
newest member of my court, majesty. May I present
Squire James of Krondor?' Master deLacy looked heavenward
as Arutha usurped his office.
Jimmy bowed as he had been instructed. Lyam gifted
the boy with a broad grin. "You I've heard of, Jimmy the
Hand,' he said as he took a step away. Then Lyam
suddenly stopped. 'i'd best check to see I've all my
belongings.' He made a show of patting himself down
while Jimmy blushed furiously. Just as he was reaching
the height of embarrassment, Jimmy saw Lyam cast a
glance his way and wink at him. Jimmy laughed with the
others. Then Jimmy turned and found himself looking into the
bluest eyes he had ever seen as a soft, feminine voice
said, 'Don't let Lyam upset you, Jimmy. He's always
been a tease.' Jimmy began to stammer, being caught by
surprise after the King's jest, then executed a ragged
bow.
'Martin said, 'i'm glad to see you again, Jimmy,' and
gripped his hand. 'We've often spoken of you and wondered
if you were faring well.'
He presented the boy to his sister. Princess Carline
nodded to Jimmy and said, "My brothers and the Princess
Anita have spoken well of you. I am pleased to finally
meet you.' Then they moved off.
Jimmy stared after, overwhelmed at the remarks. "She's
had that effect on me for a year,' came a voice from
behind, and Jimmy turned to see Laurie hurrying to keep
abreast of the royal party as it moved towards the palace
entrance. The singer touched his forehead in salute to the
boy as he hurried to the crowd, having mistaken Jimmy's
astonishment at Carline's and Martin's remarks for his
being thunderstruck by the Princess's beauty.
Jimmy returned his attention to the passing nobles and
his face split into a broad grin. "Hello, Jimmy,' said
Anita, now standing directly before him.
Jimmy bowed. "Hello, Princess.'
Anita returned Jimmy's smile and said, 'Mother, my
lord Caldric, may I present an old friend, Jimmy.' She
noted his tunic. 'Now a squire, I see.'
Jimmy bowed again before the Princess Alicia and the
Duke of Rillanon. Anita's mother presented her hand
and Jimmy awkwardly took it. 'i've wished to thank you
young Jimmy, since I heard how you aided my daughter,'
said Alicia.
Jimmy felt eyes upon him and blushed. He found within
himself no hint of the bravadocio that had sheltered him
for most of his short life. He could only stand awkwardly
while Anita said, 'We shall visit later.' Anita, her mother,
and Caldric moved forwards. Jimmy stood silently
amazed.
No further introductions were made as the other nobles
of the Kingdom passed on towards the great hall. After a
short ceremony, Lyam was due to be shown to his private
quarters. Suddenly the square erupted with the sound of drums
and shouts as people pointed off to one of the major side
streets to the palace. The royal party halted their entrance
and waited, then Lyam and Arutha began walking back
towards the top of the steps, the other nobles quickly
scurrying around as all order to the procession crumbled.
The King and Prince moved to where Jimmy and Fannon
stood, and into their view rode a full dozen mounted
warriors, each wearing a leopard skin over head and
shoulders. Perspiration glinted on their dark skin as these
fierce-looking men pounded upon drums mounted on
either side of their saddles, while carefully guiding their
mounts with their knees. Behind came another dozen
leopard-skin-covered riders, each blowing on a large brass
trumpet that curved over his shoulder. Both drummers
and trumpeters moved their horses into two lines and
allowed a procession of foot soldiers to come into view.
Each soldier wore a metal helm ending in a spike, with a
chain neck covering, and a metal cuirass. Ballooning
trousers were tucked into knee-high black boots and each
carried a round shield with a metal boss and had a long
scimitar in his belt sash. Someone behind Jimmy said,
'Dog soldiers.'
Jimmy said to Fannon, 'Why are they called that,
Swordmaster?'
'Because in the ancient days in Kesh they were treated
like dogs, penned away from the rest of the people until
it was time to turn them loose on someone. Now it's said
it's because they'll swarm over you like a pack of dogs if
you give them the chance. They're a rough lot, boy, but
we've taken their measure before.'
The dog soldiers marched into place and opened a
passage for others to move through. They drew scimitars
and saluted as the first figure came into view. He was on
foot, a giant of a man, taller than the King and broader
of shoulder. His ebony skin reflected the bright sunlight,
for he wore only a metal-studded vest above the waist.
Like the soldiers, he wore the odd trousers and boots,
but at his belt he wore a flasher, a curved sword half
again the size of a scimitar. His head was uncovered, and
in place of a shield he carried an ornamental staff of
office. Four men rode behind him, mounted on the small,
fast horses of the desert men of the Jal-Pur. They wore
the dress of desert men, not unseen but rare in Krondor
flowing knee-length robes of indigo silk, open in front
to reveal white tunics and trousers, the calf-high boots of
horsemen, and head coverings of blue cloth wrapped in
such a manner that only their eyes could be seen. Each
wore a ceremonial dagger of considerable length in his
waist sash, the handle and sheath exquisitely carved from
ivory. As the large dark man climbed the steps, Jimmy
could hear his deep voice: '. . . before him, and the
mountains tremble. The very stars pause in their course
and the sun begs his leave to rise. He is the might of the
Empire and in his nostrils the four winds blow. He is the
Dragon of the Valley of the Sun, the Eagle of the Peaks
of Tranquillity, the Lion of the Jal-Pur . . .' The speaker
approached where the King stood, with Jimmy behind,
and moved off to one side as the four men dismounted
and followed him up the steps. One walked before the
others and was obviously the subject of the giant man's
discourse.
Jimmy gave Fannon a questioning look and the
Swordmaster said, cKeshian court etiquette.'
Lyam had a sudden coughing fit and turned his head
towards Jimmy behind his hand, and the boy could see
the King was laughing at Fannon's remark. Regaining his
composure, Lyam looked forwards while the Keshian
Master of Ceremonies finished his introduction. '. . . He
is an oasis to his people.' He faced the King and bowed
low. 'Your Royal Majesty, I have the signal honour to
present his Excellency Abdur Rachman Memo HazaraKhan,
Bey of the Benni-Sherin, Lord of the Jal-Pur,
Prince of the Empire, Ambassador of Great Kesh to the
kingdom of the Isles.'
The four dignitaries bowed in Keshian fashion, the
three behind the' Ambassador falling to their knees,
briefly touching foreheads to , the stone floor. The
Ambassador placed his right hand over his heart and
bowed from the waist, his left hand extended out and
back. As all stood erect, they perfunctorily touched index
finger to heart, lips, and forehead, a gesture indicating a
generous heart, a truthful tongue, and a mind harbouring
no deceit.
Lyam said, 'We welcome the Lord of the Jal-Pur to
our court.'
The Ambassador removed his face covering, revealing
a gaunt, bearded visage of advancing years, his mouth set
in a half-smile. "Your Royal Majesty, Her Most Imperial
Majesty, blessings upon her name, sends greetings to her
brother, the Isles.' Dropping his voice to a whisper, he
added. "I would have chosen to make a less formal
entrance, Majesty, but . . .' He shrugged, with a faint toss
of his head towards the Keshian Master of Ceremonies,
indicating he had no control over such matters. 'The
man's a tyrant.'
Lyam grinned. 'We return warm greetings to Great
Kesh. May she always prosper and her bounty increase.'
The Ambassador inclined his head in thanks. 'If it
pleases Your Majesty, may I present my companions?'
Lyam nodded slightly, and the Keshian indicated the
leftmost man. "This worthy is my senior aide and adviser,
Lord Kamal Mishwa Daoud-Khan, Shereef of the BenniTular.
And these other are my sons, Shandon and Jesuz,
Shereefs of the Benni-Sherin and also my personal
bodyguards. '
'We are pleased you could join us, my lords," said
Lyam.
As Master deLacy attempted to restore some order to
the milling nobles, another commotion broke out along a
different street leading to the market square. The King
and Prince turned away from the Master of Ceremonies
and deLacy's hand went up. 'What now?' the old man
said aloud, then quickly regained his nearly vanished
poise.
A drumming more furious than the Keshians' could be
heard as brightly coloured figures came into view. Prancing
horses led a parade of soldiers in green. But each
wore a shield of vivid hue upon his arm with strange
blazons depicted. Loud pipes played a polytonal melody,
alien but bright and infectious in rhythm. Soon many of
the citizens of Krondor had taken up the beat with hand
clapping or impromptu dancing around the edge of the
square.
The first rider came before the palace and his banner
blew out in the wind. Arutha laughed and slapped Lyam
upon the shoulder. "It's Vandros of Yabon, and Kasumi's
Tsurani garrison from LaMut.' Then marching foot soldiers
came into view, and they could be heard singing
loudly.
When the Tsurani garrison of LaMut had come to
stand before the Keshians, they halted. Martin observed,
"LOOk at them, eyeing one another like tomcats. I warrant
each side would love an excuse to test the other.'
"Not in my city,' said Arutha, obviously not finding the
notion amusing.
Lyam laughed. "Well, it would be a show. Ho!
Vandros!'
The Duke of Yabon rode up and dismounted. He
hurried up the stairs and bowed. 'I beg forgiveness for
being tardy, Majesty. We were inconvenienced on the
road. We chanced upon a band of goblins raiding south
of ZUn.'
'How many in the band?' asked Lyam.
'No more than two hundred.'
Arutha said, ".'Inconvenienced". he calls it. Vandros,
you've been with the Tsurani too long.'
Lyam laughed. 'Where is the Earl Kasumi?'
'He comes now, Majesty.' Carriages could be seen
entering the square as he spoke.
Arutha took aside the Duke of Yabon and said, "Tell
your men to billet with the city garrison, Vandros. I want
them close. When you have them bedded down, come to
my quarters and bring along Brucal and Kasumi."
Vandros caught the serious tone and said, "As soon as
the men are billeted, Highness.'
The carriages from Yabon were halted before the stairs
and Lord Brucal, Duchess Felinah,'Countess Megan, and
their ladies-in-waiting got out. Earl Kasumi, formerly a
Force Commander in the Tsurani army during the Rift
war, dismounted his horse and walked quickly up the
stairs. He bowed before Lyam and Arutha. Vandros
quickly presented his party, and Lyam said, 'Unless that
pirate the King of Queg is going to arrive in a war galley
pulled by a thousand little sea horses, we shall retire.'
With a' laugh he swept past the near-distraught Master of
Ceremonies deLacy, who was vainly trying to restore
order in the King's procession.
Jimmy hung back, for while he had seen an occasional
Keshian merchant, he'd never seen a dog soldier or a
Tsurani. For all his worldly ways, outside the usual
matters of the city and its life he was still a fourteen-year
old boy.
Kasumi's undercommander was giving orders for the
billeting of his men, and the Keshian captain was doing
the same. Jimmy sat quietly on the stairs, wiggling his
toes to stretch his boots. He stared at the colourful
Keshians for a few minutes, then watched the Tsurani as
they mustered to depart the square. Both were certainly
colourful', and if Jimmy-Could judge, both looked equally
fierce.
.Jimmy was about to leave when something strange
behind the Keshians caught his eye. He tried to decide
what it was, but couldn't. Some odd itch made him walk
down the stairs until he was near the Keshians, all still at
parade rest. Then he saw what had caused him to feel
something was out of the ordinary. Retreating into the
crowd behind the Keshians was a man Jimmy had thought
to be dead. Jimmy was rocked to the soul of his being,
unable to move, for he had seen Laughing Jack vanish
into the press.

Arutha paced. Around his council table sat Laurie,
Brucal, Vandros, and Kasumi. Arutha had finished his
recounting of the assault upon the Nighthawks. He held
out a message. 'This is from Baron Highcastle, in response
to my query. He says there is some unusual movement
northwards in his area.' Arutha put down the paper. 'He
goes on to give numbers of sightings, where, and the
rest.'
'Highness,' said Vandros, "we had some movement in
our region, but nothing of great note. In Yabon clever
Dark Brothers and goblins can avoid the garrisons by
turning westwards once they're past the northern limits
of the elven forests. By skirting to the west of the Lake
of the Sky they avoid our patrols. We send few companies
into that sector. The elves and the dwarves at Stone
Mountain keep that area quiet.'
"Or so we like to think,' snorted Brucal. The old former
Duke of Yabon had resigned his office in favour of
Vandros when the latter had married Brucal's daughter.
But he was still a fine military mind and had been battling
the moredhel all his life. 'No, if they move in small
bands, the Brotherhood can come and go almost at will
through the smaller passes. We've few enough men to
keep the trading routes clear and a hell of a lot more
ground to cover than that. All they must do is move at
night and stay clear of the Hadati clan villages and the
major roads. Let's not delude ourselves by thinking
otherwise. '
Arutha smiled.' "That's why I wanted you here.'
Kasumi said, "Highness, perhaps it is' as Lord Brucal
States. We've had little contact with them in recent times.
They may have tired of our steel and now move in small,
stealthy bands.'
Laurie shrugged. Yabon-born and -raised, the singer
from Tyr-Sog knew as much about the moredhel as any
in the room. "It is something to consider; that we have all
these strange reports of goings on to the north at a time
when moredhel hands can be seen involved with the
attempts to kill Arutha.'
"I would be less 'troubled,' said Arutha, "if I knew that
crushing them in Krondor would prove sufficient. Until
we've uncovered the mystery of who is behind all this, I
think we are not through with the Nighthawks. They may
take months to re-form and be a menace, but I think
they'll return. And as I sit here, I am certain there's some
connection between the Nighthawks and what is occurring
in the north.'
A knock at the door preceded Gardan's entrance. "I
have searched everywhere, Highness, and can find no
sign of Squire James.'
Laurie said, 'Last I saw him, he was standing upon the
steps next to Swordmaster Fannon while the Tsurani were
making their entrance.
Gardan said, 'He was sitting on the steps after I
dismissed the troops.'
From a high window a voice said, "He's now sitting
above you.'
All eyes turned to see the boy sitting in a high-arched
window overlooking Arutha's chamber. Before anyone
could speak, he nimbly leapt down.
Arutha's expression showed mixed disbelief and amusement. "
When you asked to explore the roofs, I thought
you would be needing ladders and . . . help . . .'
Jimmy's manner was serious. "I saw little sense in
waiting, Highness, and besides, what sort of thief needs
ladders or help to climb walls?' He came up to Arutha.
"This place is a warren of nooks and niches a man could
secrete himself in.'
'But first he must get onto the grounds,' said Gardan.
Jimmy gave the captain a look indicating that that feat
presented no difficulty. Gardan lapsed into silence.
Laurie picked up the dropped thread of conversation.
.Well, while we don't know what's behind the Nighthawks,
at least they've been destroyed here in Krondor.'
"So I thought myself,' said Jimmy, looking about the
room. 'But this afternoon, as the crowd began to break
up, I saw an old friend in the square. Laughing Jack.'
Arutha looked hard at Jimmy. "It was my understanding
you left that traitor to the Mockers dead.'
"As dead as any man with a six-inch hole in his chest
from a steel bolt is likely to be. It's difficult getting out
and about with half your lungs missing, but after what we
saw at the whorehouse, if my own dear dead mum came
to tuck me in bed tonight I wouldn't be surprised.' Jimmy
spoke in a distracted fashion as he prowled ' around the
room. With a slightly theatrical show he said, "Aha!' and
pressed down on something behind a decorative shield on
the wall. With a groan a section of 'wall, two feet wide
and three high, swung open. Arutha went over to the
opening and peered in.
"What is this?' he asked Jimmy.
"One of many secret passages throughout the palace.
Back when we were hiding out together, Highness, I
remember the Princess Anita talking of how she fled the
palace with the aid of a serving girl. She once mentioned
"taking a passage," and I'd thought nothing of it until
today.'
Brucal looked about the room.. 'This may have been
part of the original keep, or one of the first additions.
Back home we had a bolt-hole out of the keep to the
woods. I don't know of a keep that doesn't.' He looked
thoughtful. "There may be more such passages.'
Jimmy smiled. 'A dozen or more. You walk around
the roof a little' and you'll see some very wide walls and
odd bends in passages.
Arutha said, "Gardan, I want every foot of these
passages mapped. Take a dozen men and uncover where
this one leads and where else it may empty. And see if
the royal architect has a clue if any of these passages are
shown in old plans.'
Gardan saluted and left. Vandros appeared deeply
troubled. 'Arutha, in all this I have had little time to
adjust to thoughts of assassins and Dark Brothers secretly
working with them.'
"That's why I wanted this talk before the festivities get
under way.' Arutha sat down. 'The palace is overrun with
strangers. Every noble in attendance will have dozens of
people in his retinue. Kasumi, I want your Tsurani in
every key location. They would be impossible to imfiltrate
and are above reproach. Coordinate with Gardan, and if
needs be we'll have only Tsurani, men I know from
Crydee, and my personal guards'inside the central palace.'
To Jimmy he said, 'By rights I should have you strapped
for this little escapade.' Jimmy stiffened until he saw
Arutha smile. "But I warrant anyone who tried would
end up with a dagger in the ribs to show for his efforts. I
heard of your confrontation with Squire Jerome.'
'That snot thinks himself boss cocky of the yard.'
'Well, his father's very upset, and while he's not a very
important member of my vassalage, he is certainly very
loud. Look, you leave Jerome to play head rooster all he
wants. From now on, you stay close to me. I'll tell
Master deLacy you're relieved of further duty until I say
otherwise. But keep your prowling under control until
you tell Gardan or myself you're going up on the roof.
One of my more excitable guards might put an arrow
into you before he recognized you. Things have been
somewhat tense around here of late, in case you failed to
notice.
Jimmy ignored the sarcasm. "The fellow would have to
see me first, Highness.'
Brucal slapped the table. 'Got a tongue in his head,
that one,' he said with a guffaw and approving nod.
Arutha smiled as well. He found it difficult to stay out
of sorts with the young rogue. "Enough. We've receptions
and banquets for the next week. Perhaps our concerns
are for naught and the Nighthawks are no more.'
Laurie said, "Let us-hope.'
Without further discussion, Arutha and his guests dispersed
to their own rooms.

"Jimmy.'
Jimmy turned and saw the Princess Anita coming down
the corridor in his direction, accompanied by two of
Gardan's guards and two ladies-in-waiting. When she
caught up with him he bowed. She presented her hand
and he kissed it lightly, as he had been shown by Laurie.
cWhat a young courtier you've become,' she observed
as they resumed walking.
"It seems fate has taken an interest in me, Princess. I
have never had ambitions above becoming a power in the
Mockers, perhaps even the next Upright Man, but now I
find my life has much broader horizons.'
She smiled while her ladies whispered behind their
hands. Jimmy hadn't seen the Princess since her arrival
the previous day, .and again felt the faint tugging inside
he had known the year before. He had put his boyhood
infatuation behind, but he still liked her very much.
"Have you developed ambitions, then, Jimmy the
Hand?'
In feigned scolding tones he said, 'Squire James of
Krondor, Your Highness,' and they shared a laugh.
LLook, then, Princess: this is a time of change in the
Kingdom. The long war with the Tsurani robbed us of
quite a few men with titles. Earl Volney is acting the part
of Chancellor, and there are no Dukes yet in Salador or
Bas-Tyra. Three dukedoms without masters! It seems
possible for a man of wit and talent to rise high in such
an environment.'
'Have you a plan?' Anita asked, her delight at the
boy's impudence showing in her bright green eyes and
her smile.
'Not as yet, not fully at least, but I can see the
possibility someday of a title beyond Squire. Perhaps,
even . . . Duke of Krondor.'
'First Adviser to the Prince of Krondor?' Anita said in
mock astonishment.
Jimmy winked. "I am well connected. I am a close
personal friend of his betrothed.' They both laughed.
Anita touched his arm. "It will be good to have you
here with us. I'm pleased Arutha found you so quickly.
He didn't think it would be easy locating you.'
Jimmy faltered a half-step. It had never occurred to
him that Arutha wouldn't tell Anita of the assassin, but
now he realized he hadn't. Of course, Jimmy thought to
himself, he wouldn't needlessly throw a pall over the
wedding. Quickly he recovered his poise. 'It was more an
accident than anything. His Highness never said anything
about looking for me.'
'You'll not know how Arutha and I worried about you
all the time after we left Krondor. Last we saw you, you
were fleeing across the docks from Guy's men. We had
no word of you. We passed through Krondor so quickly
on our ' way to Lyam's coronation, we had no way to
discover what had happened to you. Lyam sent warrants
pardoning Trevor Hull and his men and giving them a
commission for helping us, but no one knew what became
of Jimmy. I made Arutha promise he would straight away
begin inquiries. I didn't think he would make you a squire
just yet, but I knew he had plans for you.'
Jimmy felt genuinely moved. This revelation added
double meaning to Arutha's remark before that he liked
to think they were already friends.
Anita halted their walk, indicating a door. "I am to
stand for a fitting. My wedding gown arrived from Rillanon
this morning.'
She leaned over and kissed him lightly upon the cheek.
'Now I must go.'
Jimmy fought down strange; and frighteningly strong
emotions. "Highness . . . I am also glad to be here. We
shall have a grand time.'
She laughed and passed through the door with her
ladies, the guards taking up position outside. Jimmy
waited until the door was closed, then walked away
whistling a light tune. He reflected upon the last few
weeks of his life and judged himself happy, despite
assassins and tight boots.

Rounding a corner into a less frequented hallway,
Jimmy halted. His dagger was instantly in his hand as he
stood regarding a gleaming pair of eyes In the half
shadows before him. Then with a scuffling sound the
owner of those nearly glowing red eyes ambled out.
covered in green scales, the creature bulked about the
size of a small hound. His head resembled an alligator's,
with a rounded snout, and large wings were folded across
his back. A long, sinuous neck allowed the creature to
look backwards past an equally long tail as a young voice
shouted from behind, 'Fantus!'
A small boy, no more than six years old, came dashing
forward to throw his arms around the creature's neck. He
looked up at Jimmy with serious dark eyes and said, "He
won't hurt you, sir.
Jimmy suddenly felt awkward holding his dagger and
quickly put it away. The creature was obviously a pet,
albeit an unusual sort. 'What did you call it . . .?'
'Him? Fantus. He's my friend and he's very smart. He
knows lots of things.'
"I guess he does,' agreed Jimmy, still uncomfortable
under the creature's gaze. "What is he?'
The boy looked at Jimmy as if he were the living
incarnation of ignorance, but said, "A firedrake. We just
got here, and he followed from home. He can fly, you
know.' Jimmy only nodded. 'We' have to get back
Momma will be angry if we're not in our room.' Pulling
the creature around, the boy led him away without
another word.
Jimmy didn't move for a full minute, then looked
around as if seeking someone to validate the vision he
had witnessed. Shrugging off his astonishment, the boy
thief continued walking along. After a little while he
could hear the sound of lute strings being plucked.
Jimmy left the hallway and entered a large garden,
where Laurie was tuning his lute. The boy sat upon the
edge of a planter, crossing his feet under him, and said,
"For a minstrel, you're a sorry sight.'
'I'm a sorry sort of minstrel.' Laurie did look less than
his usual spirited self. He fiddled with his lute strings and
began a solemn tune.
After a few minutes Jimmy said, "Enough of this dirge,
singer. This is supposed to be a time of cheer. What's
made you so long in the face?'
Laurie sighed, his head cocked to one side. 'You're a
bit young to understand - '
"Ha. try me,' interrupted Jimmy.
Laurie put up his lute. "It's the Princess Carline.'
'Still wants to marry you, huh?'
Laurie's jaw dropped. 'How . . . . ?'
Jimmy laughed. 'You've been around nobles too long,
singer. I'm new to all this. I still know how to talk to
servants. More important, I know how to listen. Those
maids from Rillanon were fit to bust to tell the maids
here all about you and Princess Carline. You're quite an
item.'
Laurie seemed unamused by Jimmy's mirth. "I suppose
you've'heard the whole tale?"
Jimy took on an indifferent manner. "The Princess is
.'a prize, 'but I grew up in a whorehouse, so my views on
women are less . . . idealized.' As he thought of Anita,
his voice dropped a little. 'Still, I must admit princesses
seem different from the rest.'
"Nice that you noticed,' Laurie commented dryly.
'Well, I'll say this: your Princess is the finest-looking
woman I've seen and I've seen a lot of them, including
your better-paid courtesans, and some of them are pretty
special. Most men I know would sell their darling mothers
to get her attention. So then, what's'your problem?'
Laurie looked at the 'boy for a minute. "My problem is
this business of being a noble.'
Jimmy laughed, a genuine sound of amusement. 'WHat
problem? You just get to order people around and blame
mistakes on someone else.'
Laurie laughed. "I doubt Arutha and Lyam would
agree.'
'Well, kings and princes are a different sort, but most
of the nobles around here show me nothing. Old Volney
has somee wits, but he's not too anxious to be here anyway.
The rest just want to be important. Hell, musician, you
should marry her. You might improve the breed.'
Laurie' swung playfully at Jimmy, laughing as the brash
youngster easily ducked away, also laughing. A third
laugh caused Laurie to turn.
A short, slender, dark-haired man in fine clothing of
simple cut stood observing the proceedings. "Pug!' Laurie
exclaimed, jumping up to embrace the man. "When did
you arrive?'
'About two hours ago. I've had a brief meeting with
Arutha and the King. They're off with Earl Volney now,
discussing preparations for tonight's welcoming banquet.
But Arutha hinted there was something strange going on
and suggested I look for you.'
Laurie indicated Pug should take a seat, and he sat
beside Jimmy. Laurie made the introduction, then said,
'I've much to tell, but first: how are'Katala and the boy?'
'Fine. She's in our suite now, gossiping with Carline.'
Laurie again looked depressed at mention of the Princess.
"William ran off somewhere after Fantus.'
'That thing is yours?' exclaimed Jimmy.
'Fantus?' Pug laughed. "You've seen him, then. No,
Fantus belongs to no one. He comes and goes as he
pleases, which is why he's here without anyone's leave.'
Laurie said, "I doubt he's on deLacy's guest list. Look,
I'd best catch you up on matters of importance. ' Pug
glanced at Jimmy, and Laurie said, "This fount of trouble
here has been at the centre of things since the first. He'll
hear nothing he doesn't already know.'
Laurie told of what happened, with Jimmy adding a
few bits of information the singer missed. When they
were done, Pug said, "This business of necromancy is an
evil thing. If nothing else you said speaks of dark powers
at work, that does. This is more the province of priests
than magicians, but Kulgan and I will aid in whatever
way we can.'
"Then kulgan came from Stardock as well?'
'There would have been no stopping him. Arutha was
his student, remember? Besides, though he'd never admit
to it, I think he misses his arguments with Father Tully.
And there was no doubt Tully would officiate at Arutha's
wedding. I think that's where Kulgan is now, arguing
with Tully.'
Laurie said, 'I've not seen Tully, but he was due to
arrive this morning with those from Rillanon travelling at
a more sedate pace than the King's party. At his age he
tends to prefer things quiet.'
'He must be past eighty now.'
GCloser to ninety, but he hasn't lost a step. You should
hear him around the palace in Rillanon. Let a squire or
page fail at his lessons and he'll talk blisters on the boy's
back.'
Pug laughed. then as an afterthought, he said, 'Laurie,
how fare things with you and Carline?'
Laurie groaned and Jimmy hid a chuckle. 'That is what
we were speaking of when you appeared. Good, bad, I
don't know.'
Sympathy showed in Pug's dark eyes. "I know the
feeling, friend. When we were children, back at Crydee
Just remember, you were the one who held me to
my' promise to introduce you if we ever returned to
Midkemia from Kelewan.' He shook his head and with
a laugh added, "It's good to know some things never
change.'
Jimmy leapt off the bench. "Well, I must be off. Pleased
to make your acquaintance, magician. Cheer up, singer.
You'll either marry the Princess or you won't.' He dashed
off, leaving Laurie struggling with the logic of that statement
while Pug laughed aloud.

7

Wedding

Jimmy prowled the great hall.
The Prince's throne room was being readied, and the
other squires were supervising the activities of the pages
and porters as all the last-minute touches were being
applied. Everyone had their minds upon the ceremony,
due to get under way in less than an hour's time. Jimmy
found that the price of his being excused duty was having
nothing to do at the last, and as Arutha certainly didn't
want him underfoot right now, he was left to find his own
distraction. Jimmy couldn't shake the feeling that in the rush of
excitement few were mindful of the past dangers to the
Prince. The horrors found at the House of Willows had
been hidden behind masses of bridal flowers and festive
bunting. Jimmy noticed a black, sidelong glance from Squire
Jerome and, irritated, took a menacing step in the older
boy's direction. Jerome immediately had a need to be
somewhere else and hurried off.
A laugh sounded from behind. Jimmy saw a grinning
Squire Locklear carrying a huge bridal wreath past a
Tsurani guard, who carefully checked it. Of all the other
squires, only Locky showed Jimmy the slightest hint of
friendship. The others were either indifferent or outright
hostile. Jimmy liked the younger boy, though he tended
to prattle on about the most insignificant things. He's the
youngest child, thought Jimmy, his mother's darling. He'd
last a fast five minutes on the streets. Still, he was a cut
above the rest, whom Jimmy judged a boring lot. The
only amusement Jimmy gained from them was their
woeful imitations of worldly knowledge. No, Arutha and
his friends were far more interesting folk than the squires
with their lewd jokes and salacious speculations about
this serving girl or that, and their little games of intrigue.
Jimmy threw locky a wave and headed towards another
door.
Jimmy waited to pass through the door as one of the
porters came through. A small bunch of flowers fell from
the man's load. Jimmy bent to pick it up. As he handed it
to the porter, Jimmy was struck by a sudden realization.
The blooms, white chrysanthemums, shone with a faint
amber tint.
Jimmy looked back over his shoulder and upwards. A
full four storeys above, the high vaulted ceiling of the
chamber was punctuated by large stained-glass windows,
the colours barely noticeable unless the sun was directly
behind the panes. Jimmy studied the windows, as his
"something is not as it should be' bump was itching. Then
he understood. Each window was recessed into a cupola,
no less than five or six feet deep, plenty of room to hide a
quiet assassin. But how would someone get up there?
The design of the hall was such that scaffolding would be
needed to clean the windows, and the room had been
almost constantly occupied for the last few days.
Jimmy quickly left the hall, walked down a connecting
corridor, and went through into a terraced garden that
ran the length of the Prince's great hall.
A pair of guards approached, walking post between
the distant wall and the main palace complex, and' Jimmy
hailed them. "Pass the word. I'm going to snoop about a
bit on top of the great hall.'
They exchanged glances, but Captain Gardan had
ordered that the strange squire wasn't to be detained
should he be seen scampering about the rooftops. One
Saluted. 'Right you are, Squire. We'll pass the word so
the archers on the walls don't use you for target practice.'

Jimmy paced off alongside the wall of the Great Hall.
The garden was off to the left of the hall as you entered
the main doors, assuming you could see through the
walls, Jimmy thought to himself. Now, if I were an
assassin, where would I want to climb? Jimmy cast about
quickly and spotted a trellis that ran up the connecting
hall's outer wall. From there to the roof of the connecting
hall would be no difficulty, then . . '. Jimmy left off thinking and
acted. He studied the
configuration of the walls as he kicked off his hated dress
boots. He scampered up the trellis and ran along the roof
of the connecting hall. From there he leapt nimbly up to
a low cornice that ran the length of the great hall. Moving
with astonishing agility, he crawled along, his face pressed
to the stones, towards the far end of the great hall. When
he reached halfway to the corner, he looked up. One
storey above awaited the bottoms of the windows, tantalizingly
close. But Jimmy Knew he needed a better climbing
position and continued on until he reached the last
third of the hall. Here, outside the portion of the hall
given over to the Prince's dais, the building flared, giving
Jimmy an extra two feet of wall at a right angle to the
wall he hugged. Levering up in the angle was now
possible. Jimmy felt about until his fingers discovered a
crack between stones. He used his experience to good
advantage, shifting his weight as his toes began searching
for another hold. Slowly he inched upwards, seeming to
climb in the angle of the two walls in defiance of gravity.
It was a demanding task, requiring total concentration,
but after what seemed an eternity he reached up and his
fingers touched the ledge below the windows. Only a foot
wide, the ledge was still a potentially fatal barrier, for
any slip could send Jimmy falling to his death four storey's
below. Jimmy reached up, took a firm grip on the ledge,
and let go with his other hand. For an instant he dangled
by one hand, then he reached upwards with the other
and with a single smooth pull had a leg over the ledge.
Standing upon the narrow ledge, Jimmy turned the
corner above the rear of the dais, .faced the window, and
peered through. He wiped away some dust and was
momentarily blinded by the sun, seen through the window
and another on the wall he had just left. He waited for
his eyes to adjust again to the interior darkness as he
shaded his eyes from the sun. This would prove difficult,
he thought, until the angle of the sun changed. Then
Jimmy felt the glass move beneath his fingers, and suddenly
powerful hands clamped around his mouth and
throat.
Shocked by the sudden attack, Jimmy froze a moment
and was too tightly held when he began to struggle. A
heavy blow to the side of the head stunned him and the
world seemed to spin.
When his vision finally cleared, Jimmy could see the
snarling face of Laughing Jack before him. The false
Mocker was not only alive, but in the palace and, from
his expression and the crossbow nearby, ready and willing
to kill. 'So, you little bastard,' he whispered as he adjusted
a gag in Jimmy's mouth, 'you've turned up where you
didn't belong one time too many. I'd gut you here, right
now, but I can't risk anyone's noticing blood dripping
below.' He moved around in the scant area between
the glass  and the open space above the hall that the cupola
provided. 'But once the deed is done, over you go, boy.'
He pointed to the hall floor. He tightened some' cords
around Jimmy's hands and ankles, pulling them painfully
tight. Jimmy tried to make a sound, but it was lost in the
hum of conversation among the guests below. Jack gave
jimmy another blow to the head, which sent the boy's
~senses reeling again. Jimmy saw Jack turn to survey the
Hall below just before darkness overcame him.

Jimmy lay stunned for some unknown time, for when he
recovered his wits, he could hear the chanting of the
priests entering the hall. He knew the King and Arutha
and the other members of the court would be entering
immediately once Father Tully and the other priests were
in position. Jimmy felt panic building inside. Since he'd been dismissed
from duty, his absence would be overlooked in
the excitement of the moment. Jimmy struggled, but
Jack, being a mocker, knew how to make it difficult to
slip those bonds. Given time and a willingness to lose
some skin and blood, Jimmy would eventually rid himself
of the ropes, but time was a precious commodity at
present. With his struggling, he only managed to change
his position so he was able to see the window. He noticed
it had been tampered with to cause a single large panel of
glass to swing aside. Someone had prepared this window
days before. A change in the song below told Jimmy that Arutha
and the others were in place and Anita was beginning her
long walk down the aisle. The boy looked about frantically
for a way either to break his bonds or to make
enough noise to alert those below. The singing filled the
hall with a chorus loud enough to cover a brawl, so
Jimmy knew anything as feeble as kicking at the glass
would only bring a blow to the head from Jack. Jimmy
could hear movement close by, during a lull in the singing,
and knew Jack was placing a bolt in the crossbow.
The singing stopped, and Jimmy heard Tully's voice
begin the instructions to the bride and groom. he saw
Jack taking aim upon the dais. Jimmy was half folded in
the narrow window space, forced back against the glass
-by the kneeling Jack. Jack threw the boy a quick glance
as he began to squirm. jimmy was unable even to kick out
at Jack, who paused for a moment, evidently undecided
whether to fire at his target or silence Jimmy first. For all
the pomp, the ceremony itself was brief, so Jack seemed
willing to chance he would be untroubled by the boy a
few moments longer.
Jimmy was young, in fit condition, and an expert
acrobat from his years of scampering about the roofs of
Krondor. He acted without thought and simply flexed his
entire body so it bowed upwards, head and feet against
the sides of the cupola. he half rolled, half flipped
himself, and suddenly he sat with his back to the window.
Jack spun to look again at the boy and swore silently. He
could not afford to lose this single shot. A quick glance
downwards reassured him the boy had not alerted anyone.
Jack raised his crossbow again and took aim.
Jimmy's vision seemed 'to contract, as if all he could
see was Jack's finger on the trigger of the crossbow. He
saw the finger begin to close and kicked out wildly. His
bare feet glanced off the assassin and the crossbow fired.
Jack turned in shock and Jimmy kicked out again with
both feet. For a moment Jack looked to be calmly sitting
at the edge of the window cupola. Then he began to fall
outwards, his hands grasping wildly for the sill.
Jack's hands pressed out against the sides of the cupola
' and halted his fall. He hung in midair, not moving for an
instant, then his palms began to slip on the stone. Jimmy
rEcognized something else was strange, then realized the chanting,
almost constant in counterpoint to the ceremony,
had stopped. As Jack began his backward slide into
space, Jimmy heard shouts and screams from below.
' Then Jimmy felt a shock and his head struck stone. His
,legs felt as if they were being torn from his hips, and the
boy knew Jack had grabbed the only thing he could
reach, Jimmy's ankles. Jimmy was dragged outwards as " . Jack's weight
moved them both towards death. Jimmy
Struggled, pressing backwards with all his might, bowing
his body to slow his slide, but he might as well have had
snow heaped upon his feet for the good it did him. Bones
and muscles protested, but he could not move an inch to
rid himself of Jack. He was dragged outwards slowly, his
legs, hips, and back scraping on the stone, the cloth of
his trousers and tunic keeping skin intact. Then he was
suddenly upright, as Jack's weight tipped his balance for
an instant, teetering upon the lip of the cupola.
Then they fell. Jack released his hold upon the boy,
but Jimmy didn't notice. The stones rushed up to meet
them, to crush them in a hard embrace. Jimmy thought
his mind must be going at the last, for the stones seemed
to slow in their approach, as if some agency had ordered
the boy's last seconds of life to be prolonged. Then
Jimmy realized some force had control of him and was
slowing his descent. With a less than gentle bump he was
upon the floor of the great hall, stunned slightly, but
decidedly alive. Guards and priests surrounded him and
hands quickly lifted him as he wondered at this miracle
He saw the magician Pug moving his hands in incantation,
and felt the strange slowness vanish. Guards cut his
bonds, and Jimmy doubled in pain as the returning blood
flow burned like hot irons in his feet and hands. He
nearly fainted. Two soldiers seized his arms and kept him
from falling. As his senses cleared, he saw a half-dozen
or more holding Jack down, while others searched for the
black poison ring or other means of suicide.
Jimmy looked about, his head clearing. All around him
the room seemed frozen in horrified tableau. Father Tully
stood at Arutha's side, while Tsurani guards surrounded
the King, their eyes peering into every corner of the
room. Everyone else looked at Anita, who was cradled in
Arutha's arms as he knelt upon the stones. Her veils and
gown were spread out around her and she seemed to
sleep while he held her. She was a vision in pristine
white in the late afternoon light, except for the rapidly
expanding crimson stain upon her back.

Arutha sat in shock. He leant forward, elbows on
knees, as his eyes stared out into space, unfocused, not
seeing any of those with him in the antechamber. He saw
only the last minutes of the ceremony, again and again in
his mind's eye.
Anita had just pledged her vows, and Arutha was
listening to Tully's final blessing. Suddenly she had a
strange expression and seemed to stumble, as if shoved
hard from behind. He caught her, finding it strange she
should fall, for she was so graceful by nature. He tried to
think of a witticism that would break the tension, for he
knew she would feel embarrassed at stumbling. And she
looked so serious, with her eyes wide and her mouth half
open as if she wanted to ask some important question.
When he heard the first scream, he looked up and saw
the man hanging backwards out of the cupola high above
the dais. Instantly everything seemed to run together.
People were shouting and pointing and Pug was rushing
forward, incanting a spell. And Anita couldn't seem to
stand, no matter how he tried to help her. Then he saw
the blood.
Arutha buried his face in his hands and wept. In his
life he had never before been unable to control his
emotions. Carline placed her arms about him, holding
him tight, and her tears fell with his. She had been with
him since Lyam and three guards had pulled him from
Anita's side, leaving the priests and chirurgeons to their
work. Princess Alicia was in her quarters, near-prostrate
from grief. Gardan was off with Martin, Kasumi, and
' Vandros, supervising the guards who were searching the
grounds for any other intruders. By Lyam's order, the
palace had been sealed within minutes of the assassination
' attempt. Now the King paced the room silently, while
Volney was off in a corner, in quiet conversation with
laurie, brucal, and Fannon. They all awaited word.
:~'."The door to the outer hall opened and a Tsurani guard
announced Jimmy. He walked forward gingerly, for his legs
had been strained and scraped badly. Lyam and the
others watched as the boy thief came to stand before
Arutha. Jimmy tried to speak, but no words were forthcoming.
Like Arutha, he had relived every moment of the attack
over and over in his mind while an acolyte of Nathan'S
order had bandaged his legs. His memory had constantly
played tricks on him, as he would see Arutha's face of
days ago when he had told Jimmy his feelings of friendship,
then suddenly he would see the Prince's face as he
had knelt holding Anita, uncomprehending shock on his
features. Then Jimmy would remember Anita standing in
the hall before going for' a dress fitting. That image would
fade and he would once more see Arutha slowly lower
her to the floor as priests rushed to her side.
Jimmy again tried to speak as Arutha looked up. The
Prince's eyes focused upon the boy, and he said,
'Why Jimmy, I. . . didn't see you there.
"Jimmy saw the grief and pain in those dark brown eyes .
and felt something break inside himself. Unbidden tears
came to his eyes as the boy spoke softly.
'I . . . I tried
He swallowed hard, something seemed to be choking off his breath.
Jimmy's mouth worked, but no sound .'
came. Finally he whispered, "I'm sorry.' Then suddenly
he was on his knees before Arutha. 'i'm sorry.'
Arutha looked on uncomprehendingly for a moment,
then shook his head. He put his hand upon Jimmy's
shoulder and said, 'it's all right. It wasn't your fault.'
Jimmy knelt with his head cradled in his arms upon
Arutha's knees, sobbing loudly while Arutha awkwardly
tried to comfort him. Laurie knelt beside him and said,
'You couldn't have done anything more.'
Jimmy raised his head and looked at Arutha. "But I
should have.' Carline leaned over and gently ran her hand down the
side of his face, wiping away the tears. 'You went to
investigate, which no one else did. Who knows what
would have happened if you hadn't.' She left unspoken
the thought that Arutha might be lying dead had Jimmy
not kicked at Laughing Jack when he fired.
Jimmy was disconsolate. He said, 'I should have done
more.'
Lyam crossed to where Laurie, Carline, and Arutha
were clustered around Jimmy. He also knelt beside the
boy as 'Laurie made room. "Son, I've seen men who
would fight goblins go pale at the thought of climbing out
where you did. Each of us has fears,' he said softly. 'But
when something terrible happens, each .of us always
thinks, I should have done more.' He placed his hand
over Arutha's, which still rested upon Jimmy's shoulder.
'i've just had to order the Tsurani guards responsible for
searching the hall not to kill themselves. At least you
don't have that twisted a sense of honour.'
Seriously Jimmy said, "If I could trade places with the
Princess, I would.'
Lyam spoke solemnly. 'I know you would, son, I know
you would.'
Arutha, as if slowly returning from some distant place
said, 'Jimmy . . . just so you know . . . you did well
Thank you.' He tried to smile.
Jimmy, with tears still on his cheeks, hugged Arutha's
knees hard, then sat back, wiping at his face, returning
Arutha's smile. 'i've not cried since the night I saw my
mum murdered.' Carline's hand went to her mouth and
her face turned white.

The door to the antechamber opened and Nathan came
through. He wore only his white knee-length undertunic,
having stripped off his ceremonial robes to supervise the
care of the Princess. He was wiping his hands upon a
cloth and he looked haggard. Arutha slowly rose, Lyam
holding his arm. Nathan looked grim as he said, "She
lives. Though the wound is severe, the bolt struck at a
glancing angle that saved her spine. Had the bolt hit full
on, death would have been instantaneous. She is young
and healthy, but . . .'
'But what?' asked Lyam.
'The bolt was poisoned, Your Majesty. And it is a
poison fashioned with foul arts, a concoction using evil
spells. We have been able to do nothing to counter it.
Alchemy or magic, nothing works.'
Arutha blinked. Comprehension seemed to elude him.
Nathan looked at Arutha, his eyes reflecting his sorrow
"I'm sorry, Highness. She's dying.'

The dungeon lay beneath sea level, damp and dark, the
air musty with the sour smells of moulds and algae. A
guard moved aside while another pulled open a protesting
door as Lyam and Arutha passed through the portal.
Martin waited off to one side in the torture chamber,
speaking softly with Vandros and Kasumi. This room had
not been used since before Prince Erland's time, except
for a short period when Jocko Radburn's secret police
had used it to interrogate prisoners during du Bas-Tyra's
reign. The room had been cleared of the usual instruments of
torture, but a brazier had been returned to its former
place and irons were heating within. One of Gardan's
soldiers tended the burning coals. Laughing Jack stood
chained to a pillar of stone, his hands above his head.
Standing in full circle around him were six Tsurani, close
enough that the groaning prisoner touched them as he
moved. Each faced outwards, maintaining a level of
vigilance unmatched by even the most loyal of Arutha's
Household Guard. From another part of the chamber, Father Tully left
the side of several other priests, all of whom had been
present at the wedding. He said to Lyam, 'We have
established protective spells of the most powerful sort.'
He pointed at Jack. 'But something seeks to gain access
to him. How fares Anita?'
Lyam shook his head slowly. 'The bolt was poisoned in
some arcane fashion. Nathan says her time grows short.'
'Then we must question the prisoner quickly,' said the
old priest. 'We have no idea what we are combatting.'
Jack groaned aloud. Arutha's rage rose up and he
nearly choked with fury. Lyam pushed past his brother,
motioned for a guard to step aside, and looked the thief
in the eyes. Laughing Jack looked back with eyes wide
with fear. His body gleamed and sweat dripped off his
hooked nose. Each time he moved, he groaned. The
Tsurani had obviously not been gentle when they searched
him. Jack tried to speak, wetted his lips with his tongue,
then said, "Please . . .' His voice was hoarse. 'Don't let
him take me. '
Lyam stepped up beside him and grabbed Jack, his
hand closing on the man's face like a vice. Shaking Jack's
head, he said, "What poison did you use?'
Jack was near tears when he spoke. 'I don't know.
I SWear it!'
"We shall have the truth out of you, man. You had
better answer, for we can make it hard on you.' Lyam
indicated the burning irons.
Jack tried to laugh, but it became a bubbling sound.
'Hard? You think I fear irons? Listen you, King of the
bloody damn Kingdom, I'll gladly let you burn out my
liver if you promise you won't let him take me.' The last
statement had a hysterical note in it.
Lyam threw a quick glance around the room. "Let who
take 'him?'
Tully said, "He's been yelling for an hour not to let
'him" take him.' The priest's expression betrayed a
thought. "He's made a compact with dark powers. Now
he fears to pay.' he said with sudden certainty.
Jack nodded his head emphatically, eyes wide. With a
rough, half-sob, he said, 'Aye, priest, as would you if
you'd ever been touched by that darkness.'
Lyam grabbed Jack by his stringy hair and jerked his
head back. 'What are you speaking of?'
jack's eyes grew round. 'Murmandamus,' he
whispered.
Suddenly there was a cold chill in the room and the
coals in the brazier and the torches on the wall seemed to
flicker and fade. 'He's here!' shrieked Jack, out of control.
One of the priests began to chant and after a moment the
light brightened.
Tully looked towards Lyam. 'That was . . . frightening.'
His face was drawn and his eyes wide. 'it has tremendous
power. Hurry, Majesty, but speak not that name. It only
serves to draw it to its minion here.'
"What was the poison?' Lyam demanded.
Jack sobbed, "I don't know. In truth. It was something
the goblin kisser gave me, the Dark Brother. I swear it.'
The door opened and Pug entered, followed by the
stout figure of another magician, this one wearing a bushy
grey beard. Pug's dark eyes mirrored the sombre tone of
his voice when he said, 'Kulgan and I have established
wards around this part of the palace, but something
batters them even as we speak.'
Kulgan, his face wan as if he had just finished some
taxing labour, added, "Whatever is seeking to enter is
determined. Given time, I think we could unravel something
of its nature, but . . .'
Tully finished the thought. . . . it will win past us
before we can. So time is something we lack.' To Lyam
he said, 'Hurry.
Lyam said, 'This thing you serve, or this person,
whatever it is, tell us what you know. Why does it seek
my brother's death?'
'A bargain!' shouted Jack. "I'll tell you what I know
everything, just don't let him take me.'
Lyam nodded curtly. 'We shall keep him from you.'
'You don't know,' Jack screamed, then his voice fell
off to a half-sob. 'I was dead. Do you understand? That
bastard shot me instead of Jimmy and I was dead.' He
looked at those around the room. "None of you can
know. I could feel life slip away, and then he came.
When I was almost dead, he took me to this cold, dark
place and he . . . hurt me. He showed me . . . things' . He
said I could live and serve him and he'd give me back
life, or he'd . . . he'd let me die and leave me there. He
couldn't save me then, for I wasn't his. But now I am.
He's . . . evil.'
Julian, the priest of lims-Kragma, came up behind the
King. 'He lied to you, man. That cold place was of his
fashioning. Our mistress's love brings comfort to all who
embrace her at the end. You were shown a lie.'
'He's the father of all liars! But now I'm his creature,'
Jack sobbed. 'He said I had to go to the palace and kill
,the Prince. He said I was the only one he had left and the
others would arrive too late, wouldn't be here for days. It
had to be me. I said I would, but . . . I botched it and
now he wants my soul!' the last was a Piteous cry, a Plea
for mercy beyond the power of the King to grant.
Lyam turned to Julian. "Can we do anything?'
Julian said, "There is a rite, but . . .' He looked at Jack and said,
"You will die, man, you know that. You died
' already and you are here because of an unholy compact.
What will be will be. You will die within the hour. Do
you understand?'
Through tears and spittle Jack sobbed, 'Yes.'
'Then you will answer our questions and tell us what
you know, and die willingly to free your soul?' Jack's
eyes screwed shut and he cried like a child, but he nodded
his head.
'So tell us what you know of the Nighthawks and this
plot to kill my brother,' demanded Lyam.
Jack sniffed and gasped for air.
'SiX, SeVen mOnthS ago, Golden Base tells me he's tumbled to something
that could make us wealthy.' As he spoke, Jack's voice
lost the hysterical quality. 'I asked him if he'd cleared it
with the Nightmaster, but he says it's not Mocker business.
I'm not sure it's a good idea playing fast and loose
with the guild, but I'd not mind an extra sovereign on the
side, so I say '"Why not?" and I go with him. We met this
fellow Havram, who'd worked with us before, and who
asks a bunch of questions but isn't giving with answers,
so I get ready to chuck' the whole deal, before I even
know what's going on, but then he lays this bag of gold
on the table and tells me there's more to be had.'
Jack closed his eyes and a half-choked sob came from
his throat. 'I came with Golden and Havram to the
Willows, through the sewer. I nearly messed myself when
I saw the goblin kisser's, two of them, in the cellar. They
had gold, though, and I will put up with a lot for gold. So
they tell me I've got to do this and that and listen up to
what's coming along from the Upright Man and Nightmaster
and Daymaster and tell them. I tell them that's a
death warrant, then they pull out their swords and tell
me it's a death warrant if I don't. I thought I'd go along,
then turn my bashers loose on them, but they took me up
to another room in the Willows, and this fellow, all in
robes, was there. I couldn't see his face but he sounded
funny, and he stank. I smelled that stink once when I was
a kid, and I'll never forget it.'
"What?' said Lyam.
'in a cave once I smelled it. Snake.'
Lyam turned to Tully, who gasped. 'A Pantathian
serpent priest!' The other priests in the room looked
aghast and began speaking quietly with one another.
Tully said, 'Continue, time grows short.'
'Then they start doing things like I never seen before .
I'm no misty-eyed virgin, thinking the world's pure and
lovely, but these blokes were something I've never dreamt
of. They brought in a kid! A little girl, no more than
eight or nine. I thought I'd seen it all. The one in the
robes pulls a dagger and . . .' Jack gulped, obviously
fighting down the contents of his stomach. 'They drew
these diagrams with her blood and took some sort of
oath. I'm not one for the gods, but I've always tossed a
coin to Ruthia and Banath on the high holidays. But now
I'm praying to Banath like I'm robbing the city treasury
in broad daylight. I don't know if that had anything to do
with it, but they didn't make me take the oath . . .' His
voice broke into a sob. "Man, they were drinking her
blood!' he took a deeP breath. "I agreed to work with
them. Everything went all right until they told me to
ambush Jimmy.'
.Who are these men and what do they want?' demanded
Lyam.
'This goblin kisser tells me one night that there's some
sort of prophecy about the Lord of the West. The Lord
of the West must die, then something's going to happen.'
Lyam shot a glance at Arutha. "You said they called
you Lord of the West.'
Arutha had regained some measure of self-control and
said, 'Yes, they have, twice.'
Lyam returned to the questioning. 'What else?'
'I don't know,' said Jack, nearly exhausted. "They
would talk. among themselves. I wasn't properly one of
them.' Again the room shuddered and the coals and
torches flickered. 'He's here!' jack shrieked.
, Arutha came to stand at Lyam's shoulder.
'What about the poison?' he demanded.
"I don't know,' Jack sobbed.
'it was something the goblin kisser gave me. It' - he nodded - "one of them
called it "Silverthorn".'
Arutha looked rapidly around the room but could see
no one who recognized that name.
Suddenly one of the priests said, 'it has returned.'
Several of the priests began incantations
then stopped,
and one said, "it has won past our wards.
Lyam said to Tully, "Are we in danger?'
Tully replied, "The dark powers may directly control
only those who have willingly given themselves over to
them. We are safe from direct attack here.'
The room began to chill as the torches flickered madly,
and shadows deepened on all sides. "Don't let him take
me!' jack shrieked. 'You promised!'
Tully looked to Lyam, who nodded and indicated that
Father Julian should take charge.
The King motioned for the Tsurani guards to give the
priest of lims-Kragma room. The priest stood before
Jack and asked, 'Do you find in your heart the earnest
desire to receive our mistress's mercy?'
Jack couldn't speak for terror. Through tear-filled eyes
he blinked, then nodded. Julian began a low, quiet chant
and the other priests made quick gestures. Tully came
over to Arutha and said, 'Stay calm. Death is now among
US.'
It was over quickly. One moment Jack was sobbing
uncontrollably, then abruptly he slumped down, prevented
from falling only by the chains. Julian turned to
the others. 'He is safe with the Mistress of Death. No
harm can come to him now.'
Suddenly the very walls of the chamber seemed to
shake. A black presence could be felt in the room and
a high-pitched keening began, as something inhuman
shrieked in outrage at being robbed of its minion. All the
priests, as well as Pug and Kulgan, mounted a magic
defence against the invading spirit, then suddenly everything
was deathly quiet.
Tully, looking shaken, said, "it has fled.

Arutha knelt beside the bed, his face a stony mask. Anita
lay with her hair falling upon the white pillow like a dark
red crown. "She seems so tiny,' he said softly. He looked
at those in the room. Carline clung to Laurie's arm, while
Martin waited with Pug and Kulgan next to the window.
In silence Arutha's eyes beseeched them all. All looked
down on the princess, except Kulgan, who seemed lost in
thoughts of his own. They stood the deathwatch, for
Nathan had said the young Princess wouldn't last the
hour. Lyam was in another room attempting to comfort
Anita's mother.
Suddenly Kulgan moved around the bed and, in a voice
made loud by the hushed tones of the others, asked
Tully, 'if you had a question and you could ask it only
once, where would you go to ask it?'
Tully blinked. "Riddles?' Kulgan's expression, his bushy
grey eyebrows meeting over his prominent nose, showed
he was not attempting some tasteless jest. 'i'm sorry,
said Tully. "Let me think . . .' Tully's aged face furrowed
in concentration. Then he looked as if some obvious truth
had struck. "Sarth!'
Kulgan tapped the old cleric in the chest with a forefinger. '
Right. Sarth.'
Arutha, who had been following the conversation, said,
"Why Sarth? It is one of the least important ports in the
Principality."
'Because,' answered Tully, 'there is an Ishapian abbey
near there that is said to house more knowledge than any
other place in the Kingdom.'
'And,' added Kulgan, 'if there was any place in this
Kingdom where we could discover the nature of Silverthorn,
and what would counter it, that would be the
place. '
Arutha looked helplessly down at Anita. 'But Sarth
No rider could reach there and return in less than a week and . . . ' .
Pug stepped forward. "I may be able to help.'
 With sudden authority he said, 'Leave the room. All of you,
except Fathers Nathan, Tully, and Julian.' He said to
Laurie, 'Run to my rooms. Katala will give you a large
red-leather-bound book. Bring it at once.'
Without question Laurie dashed off, while the others
vacated the room. Pug spoke softly to the priests. "Can
you slow her passage through time without harm?'
Nathan said, "I can work such a spell. I did so with the
wounded Dark Brother before he died. But it will gain us
only a few hours.' He looked down at Anita, whose face
had already taken on a cold blue appearance. Nathan
touched her forehead. "She grows clammy to the touch
She fails fast. We must hurry.'
The three priests quickly fashioned the pentagram and
lit the candles. Within minutes they had prepared the
room and soon the rite was done. The Princess lay,
apparently asleep, in a bed engulfed by a rosy glow seen
when viewed askance. Pug led the priests from the room
and asked for sealing wax to be brought. Martin ordered
it and a page ran off. Pug took the book he had asked
Laurie to fetch. He re-entered the room and paced
around it, reading from his tome. When he was finished,
he stepped outside and began a long string of incantations.
He finished by placing a seal of wax upon the wall near
the door. He then closed the book. it is done.'
Tully moved towards the door, and Pug's hand
restrained him. "Do not cross the threshold.' The old
priest looked at Pug questioningly.
Kulgan shook his head in appreciation. "Don't you see
what the boy's done, Tully?' Pug was forced to smile, for
even after he'd grown long white whiskers, he'd still be a
boy to Kulgan. 'Look at the candles!'
The others looked in, and in a moment all could see
what the stout magician meant. The candles at the corners
of the pentagram were alight, although this was difficult
to see in the daylight. But when they were watched
closely, it was clear the flames didn't flicker. Pug said to
the others, "Time moves so slowly in that room it is
nearly impossible to detect its passage. The wall of this
palace would crumble to dust before the candles burn a
tenth part of their length. Should anyone cross the threshold,
he will be caught like a fly in amber. It would mean
death, but Father Nathan's spell slows time's ravages
within the pentagram and prevents harm to the Princess.'
'How long will it last?' said Kulgan, obviously in awe
of his former student.
'Until the seal is broken.'
Arutha's face betrayed the first flickerings of hope.
"She will live?'
"She lives now,' said Pug. "Arutha, she exists between
moments, and will stay that way, forever young, until the
spell is removed. But then time will once again flow for
her and she will need a cure, if one exists.'
Kulgan gave out with an audible sigh. 'Then we have
gained that which we needed most. Time.'
"Yes, but how much?' asked Tully.
Arutha's voice was firm. 'Enough. I shall find a cure.'
Martin said, "What do you intend?'
Arutha looked at his brother, and for the first time that
day was free of the crippling grief, the madness of despair.
Coldly, evenly he said, "i will go to Sarth.'

8

Yo w

Lyam sat unmoving. He studied Arutha for a long moment and shook his
head. "No. I forbid it.' Arutha registered no reaction as he said, 'Why?'

Lyam sighed. 'Because it's too dangerous, and you've
other responsibilities here.' Lyam rose from behind the
table in Arutha's private quarters and crossed over to his
brother. Gently placing his hand on Arutha's arm, he
said, 'i know your nature, Arutha. You hate sitting idly
by while matters are moving to conclusion without you. I
know you cannot abide the thought of Anita's fate resting
in hands other than your own, but in good conscience I
cannot allow you to travel to Sarth.'
Arutha's expression remained clouded, as it had been
since the assassination attempt the day before. But with
the death of Laughing Jack, Arutha's rage had fled,
seeming to turn inwards, becoming cold detachment.
Kulgan and Tully's revelation of a possible source of
knowledge existing in Sarth had cleansed his mind of the
initial madness. Now he had something to do, something
that required clarity of judgement, the ability to think
rationally, coolly, dispassionately. Fixing his brother with
a penetrating look, he said, 'i've been away for months,
travelling abroad with you, so the business of the Western
Realm can endure my absence for another few weeks. As
for my safety,' he added, his voice rising in inflection,
'we've all seen just how safe I am in my own palace.' He
fell into silence for a moment, then said, "i will go to
Sarth.' Martin had been quietly sitting in the corner, observing
the debate, listening closely to both his half brothers. He
leaned forward in' his chair. "Arutha' , I've known' you'

since you were a babe and I know your moods as well as
my own. You think it impossible to leave vital matters to
the care of others. You have a certain arrogance to your
nature, little brother. It is a trait, a flaw of character if
you will, we all share.'
Lyam blinked as if surprised to be included in the
indictment. "All . . .?'
The corner of Arutha's mouth turned up in a half-smile
as he let out a deep sigh. 'All, Lyam,' Martin said. "We're
all three Boric's sons, and for his good qualities, Father
could be arrogant. Arutha, in temper you and I are as
one, I simply mask myself better. I can think of little to
make me chafe more than sitting while others are about
tasks I feel better able to accomplish, but at the last,
there is no reason for you to go. There are others better
suited. Tully, Kulgan, and Pug can set pen to parchment
with all the questions required for the Abbot at Sarth.
And there are those better suited to carry such messages
quickly and without notice through the woods between
here and Sarth.'
Lyam scowled. "Such as a certain duke from the West

I expect.'
Martin smiled his crooked smile, a reflection of
Arutha's. 'Not even Arutha's Pathfinders are as adept at
travelling through the woods as one elver-taught. If this
Murmandamus has agents along the woodland trails,
there is no one south of Elvandar more likely to win past
them than I.'
Lyam cast his eyes heavenward in disgust. 'You are no
better than he.' He crossed to the doors and pulled them
open. Arutha and Martin followed behind. Gardan waited
without, and his company of guards snapped to attention
as their monarch left the chamber. To Gardan, Lyam
said, "Captain, should either of our half-witted brothers
attempt to leave the palace, arrest
him and lock him up.

That is our royal will. Understood?'
Gardan saluted. 'Yes, Your Majesty.'
Without another word, Lyam strode down the hall

towards his own quarters, his face a mask of worry and
preoccupation. Behind him Gardan's guards exchanged
astonished glances, then watched Arutha and Martin
leave in another direction. Arutha's face was flushed, his
anger only partially hidden, while Martin's expression
revealed nothing of his feelings. When the two brothers
were out of sight, questioning glances passed from soldier
to soldier, for they had heard every word exchanged
between the King and his brothers, until Gardan spoke in
soft but commanding tones. 'Steady on. You're at post.'

'Arutha!' Arutha and Martin, who had been speaking softly as
they walked, halted as the Keshian Ambassador hurried
to overtake them, his retinue following behind. He
reached them, bowed slightly, and said, 'Your Highness,
Your Grace.'
'Good day, Your Excellency,' Arutha responded somewhat
curtly. The presence of Lord Hazara-Khan reminded
him there were obligations of office going unmet. Sooner
or later, Arutha knew, he would have to return his
attention to the mundane concerns of governance. That
thought rankled him.
The Ambassador said, "i have been informed, Your
Highness, that I and my party will require permission to
quit the palace. Is this so?'
Arutha's irritation intensified, though now it was
directed at himself. He had secured the palace as a matter
of course, but had done so without considering the often
sticky question of diplomatic immunity, that necessary oil
in the usually squeaky machinery of international
relations. With a note of apology he said, 'My lord
Hazara-Khan, I am sorry. In the heat of the moment
"i fully understand, Highness.' Looking quickly about,
he said, 'May I also have a brief moment? We could
speak as we walk.' Arutha indicated he might, and Martin
dropped back to walk with Hazara-Khan's sons and
bodyguard. The Ambassador said, 'it would be a poor
time to pester the King over treaties. I think it a proper
time to visit my people in the , Jal-Pur. I will stay there
awhile. I'll return to your city, or to Rillanon, as needed,
to discuss 'treaties, after . . . things have settled.'
Arutha studied the Ambassador. Volney's intelligence
on him had revealed that the Empress had dispatched
one of her finest minds to negotiate with the Kingdom.
'My lord Hazara-Khan, I thank you for considering my
own feelings and those of my family at this time.'
The Ambassador waved away the remark. "There is no
honour in -besting those afflicted by sorrow and woe.
When this evil business is over, I desire you and your
brother to come to the negotiating table with clear minds,
when we discuss the Vale of Dreams. I wish to win
concessions from the best you have to offer, Highness.
Now it would be too simple to gain advantage. You
need Kesh's approbation in the matter of the King's
forthcoming wedding to the Princess Magda of Roldem.
As she is the only daughter of King Carole, and if
anything happens to her brother, Crown Prince Bravos,
any child of hers would sit the thrones of both the Isles
and Roldem, and as Roldem has long been seen as lying
within Kesh's traditional sphere of influence . . . well
you can see how we are concerned.'
"My compliments to the Imperial Intelligence Corps,
Excellency,' said Arutha in rueful appreciation. Only he
and Martin had known.
'Officially, no such group exists, though we do have
certain sources - those wishing to maintain the status
quo.'
"I appreciate your candour, Excellency. We also must
concern our discussions with the question of a new
Keshian war fleet being constructed in Durbin in violation
of the Treaty of Shamata.'
Lord Hazara-Khan shook his head and said with affection, '
Oh, Arutha, I look forward to bargaining with
you.' "And I with you. I'll order the guards to allow your
party to leave at will. I only ask that you ensure that no
one not of your retinue slips out in disguise.'
'I shall stand at the gate and name every soldier and
servant as they Pass, Highness.'
Arutha had no doubts he would be able to do just that.
"No matter what fate brings, Abdur Rachman Memo

Hazara-Khan, even should we someday face each other
across a battlefield, I will count you a generous, honourable
friend.' He extended his hand.
Abdur took it. 'You do me honour, Highness. As long
as I speak with Kesh's voice, she will negotiate only in
good faith, towards honourable ends.'
The Ambassador signalled for his companions to join
him, and after asking Arutha's leave they departed.
Martin came to Arutha's side and said, 'At least we now
have one fewer problem for the moment.'
Arutha nodded in agreement. 'For the moment. That
wily old fox will probably end up with this palace for his
embassy and I'll be left with some flophouse near the
docks to hold court in.'
"Then we shall need to have Jimmy recommend one of

the better ones to us.' Suddenly struck by a thought,
Martin said, 'Where is he? I've not seen him since we
questioned Laughing Jack.'
'Out and about. I had a few things for him to do.'
Martin indicated understanding and the two brothers
continued down the hall.

Laurie spun at the sound of someone entering his room.
Carline closed the door behind her, then stopped as she
observed the singer's travel bundle resting next to his lute
upon his bed. He had just finished tying it and he wore
his old travel clothing. Her eyes narrowed and she nodded
once, knowingly. 'going somewhere?' Carline's tone was
icy. "Just thought you'd take a quick run up to Sarth and
ask a few questions, right?'
Laurie raised his hands in supplication. 'Just for a
while, beloved. I'll be quickly back.'
Sitting down on the bed, she said, "oh~ You're as bad
as Arutha or Martin. You'd think everyone in the palace
didn't possess the brains to blow their noses without one
of you telling them how. So you'll get your head lopped
off by some bandit, or . . . something. Laurie, I get so
angry sometimes.' He sat next to her and placed his arm
around her shoulders. She leaned her head against his
shoulder. "We've had so little time together since we
arrived, and everything is so . . . terrible.' Her voice
broke as she began to cry. 'Poor Anita,' she said after a
while. Defiantly wiping away her tears, she went on, 'I
hate it when I cry.
'And I'm still angry with you. You were going to run
off and leave without a goodbye. I knew it. Well, if you
go, don't come back. Just send a message about what you
find out - if you live that long - but don't set foot in this
palace. I don't ever want to see you again.' She rose to
her feet and made for the door.
Laurie was after her in an instant. He took her by the
arm and turned her to face him. "Beloved, please . . .
don't . . .'
With tears in her eyes she said, "if you loved me, you'd
ask Lyam for my hand. I'm done with sweet words,
Laurie. I'm done with vague unease. I'm done with you.'
Laurie felt panic overtake him. He had been ignoring
Carline's earlier threat to be through with him or married
to him by the time she returned to Rillanon, as much
from choice as from the pressure of events. 'I wasn't
going to say anything until this business with Anita was
resolved, but - I've decided. I can't let you leave me out
of your life. I do want to marry you.'
Suddenly her eyes were wide. 'What?'
'I said I want to marry - '
She covered his mouth with her hand. Then she kissed
him. For a long silent moment no words were necessary.
She pushed away, a dangerous half-smile on her face.
Shaking her head in the negative, she spoke softly. 'No.
Say nothing more. I'll not have you fog my mind again
with honeyed words.' She slowly walked to the door and
opened it. 'Guards!' she called and in an instant a pair
appeared. Pointing at an astonished Laurie, she said,
'Don't let him move. If he tries to leave, sit on him!'
Carline vanished from sight down the hall, and the
guards turned amused expressions on Laurie. He sighed
and sat down quietly upon his bed.
A few minutes later the Princess was back, an irritated
Father Tully in tow. The old prelate had his night robe
hastily gathered about him, as he had been almost ready
for sleep. Lyam, looking equally inconvenienced, fol-
lowed his sister. Laurie fell backwards onto the bed with
an audible groan as Carline marched into the room and
pointed at him. "He told me he wants to marry me!'
Laurie sat up. Lyam regarded his sister with an aston-
ished expression. "Should I congratulate him or have him
hung? From your tone it's difficult to tell.'
Laurie bolted upright as if stuck by a needle and moved
towards the King. 'Your Majesty - '
'Don't let him say anything,' interrupted Carline, pointing
an accusatory finger at Laurie. In a menacing whisper,
she said, 'He is the king of all liars and a seducer of the
innocent. He'll talk his way out of it.'
Lyam shook his head as he muttered, 'innocent?'
Suddenly his face clouded. 'Seducer?' He fixed his gaze
upon Laurie.
"Your Majesty, please,' began Laurie.
Carline crossed her arms and impatiently tapped her
foot on the floor. 'He's doing it,' she muttered. 'He's
talking his way out of marrying me.
Tully interposed himself between Carline and Laurie.
"Majesty, if I may?'
Looking confused, Lyam said, "I wish you would.'
Tully looked first at Laurie, then at Carline. 'Am I to
understand, Highness, that you wish to wed this man?'
'Yes!'
'And you, sir?'
Carline began to say something, but Lyam cut her off.
"Let him speak!'
Laurie stood blinking at the sudden silence. He
shrugged as if to say he didn't understand the commotion.
'Of course I do, father.'
Lyam looked close to the end of his patience. 'Then
what is the difficulty?' He said to Tully, "Post banns, oh,
next week sometime. After the last few days we should
wait a bit. We'll have the wedding after . . . things settle
a bit. If you have no objections, Carline?' She shook her
head, her eyes moist. Lyam continued, "Someday, when
you're an old married  lady with dozens of grandchildren,
you'll have to explain all this to me.' To Laurie he said,
'You're a braver man than most,' then, with a glance at
his sister, added, 'and luckier than most.' He kissed her
on the cheek. 'Now, if there's nothing else, I'll retire.
Carline threw her arms around his neck and gave him a
fierce hug. 'Thank you.'
Still shaking his head, Lyam left the room. Tully said,
'There must be a reason for this urgent need of betrothal
at this late hour.' He held his hands palms out and quickly
added, 'But I'll wait to hear it some other time. Now, if
you'll excuse me - ' He gave Carline no opportunity to
say anything as he almost dashed from the room. The
guards followed after, closing the door behind them.
Carline smiled at Laurie after they were alone. "Well, it
is done. Finally.' Laurie grinned down at her as he put his arms about

her waist. "Yes, and with little pain.'
"Little pain!' she said, punching him in the stomach
with not inconsiderable effect. Laurie doubled over, the
wind knocked out of him. He fell backwards, landing
upon his bed. Carline came to the edge of the bed and
knelt next to him. As he tried to sit up, she pushed him
back on the bed with her hand on his chest. "What am I,
some dowdy drudge you must endure for the sake of
political ambitions?' She playfully pulled at the leather
thongs of his tunic. 'I should have you thrown in the
dungeon. Little pain, you monster.'
Gripping a handful of her dress, he yanked her forward.
bringing her face close enough to be kissed. With a grin,
he said, 'Hello, my love.' Then they were in each other's
arms. Later, Carline roused from a half-doze to say, 'Happy?'

Laurie laughed, causing her head to jiggle on his chest
where it lay. 'Of course.' Stroking her hair, he said,
'What was all that about with your brother and Tully?'
She chuckled. 'After almost a year of trying to get you
to marry me., I wasn't about to let you forget you
proposed. For all I knew, you were simply trying to get
rid of me so you could sneak away to Sarth.'
'Sweet good night!' said Laurie, jumping out of bed
'Arutha!'
Carline turned and settled back into the just-vacated
pillow. 'So you and my brother are both sneaking off.'
"Yes - no, I mean - oh hell.' Laurie pulled on his
trousers and stood looking about. "Where is my other
boot? I'm at least an hour overdue.' When he was
dressed, he came to sit next to her on the bed. "I must
go. Arutha won't let anything stop him. You knew that.'
She held tightly to his arm. "I knew you'd both go.
How do you plan to get out of the palace?'
~Jimmy.' She nodded. "There's an exit he forgot to mention to

the royal architect, I expect.'
"Something like that. I must go.'
She clung to his arm for a moment. "You didn't take
your vows lightly, did you?'
'Never.' He bent over to kiss her. "Without you, I am
nothing.' Silently she cried, feeling at once filled and empty
knowing for certain she had found her life's mate and
fearing to lose him. As if reading her thoughts, he said,
"I'll be back, Carline. nothing could keep me from you.'
'if you don't, I'll come after you.'
With a quick kiss he was gone, the door closing
quietly behind him. Carline burrowed deeply into the bed,
holding on to the last remaining warmth of him as long as
she could.

Laurie slipped through the door into Arutha's suite while
the guards in the hall were at the far end of their walking
tour. In the dark he heard his name whispered. "Yes,' he
replied. Arutha unshuttered a lantern, lighting the room. The
single light source made the antechamber of Arutha's
suite appear cavernous. Arutha said, 'You're late.' To
Laurie he and Jimmy appeared alien figures as they stood
lit from below by the yellow lantern glow. Arutha wore
simple mercenary garb: knee-high cavalier boots, heavy
woollen trousers, a heavy leather jerkin over a blue tunic.
and his rapier belted at his side. Over all he wore a heavy
grey cloak, the deep hood thrown back over his shoulders,
but what caused Laurie to stare for a moment was the
light that seemed to come from Arutha's eyes. About to
embark upon the journey to Sarth at last, he was afire
with impatience.
'Lead the way.' Jimmy showed them to a low hidden door in the wall,

and they entered. Through the ancient tunnels of the
palace Jimmy moved quickly, down to a level deeper
than even the damp dungeon. Arutha and Laurie kept
quiet, though the singer was given to an occasional silent
oath when something he stepped on scampered away or
squished. He was pleased at the lack of good light.
Suddenly they were moving up rough stone steps.
At the top landing, Jimmy pushed upwards against a
protesting section of seemingly blank stone ceiling. It
moved slightly and Jimmy said, 'it's a tight squeeze.' He
wiggled through and took their belongings as they passed
them along. The base of an outer stone wall had been
cleverly counterweighted to swing from one side, but age
and disuse had made it stubborn. Arutha and Laurie
managed to wriggle through. Arutha said, "Where are
we?"
'Behind a hedge in the royal park. The postern gate to
the palace is about a hundred and fifty yards off that
way,' answered Jimmy. He indicated a direction. "Follow
me.' He led them through thick shrubbery and into a
stand of trees, in which three horses waited.
Arutha said, "I didn't ask you to purchase three
mounts.' With an insolent grin, visible in the moonlit night,

Jimmy said, 'But you also didn't tell me not to, Highness.'
Laurie decided it was best not to get involved, so he
busied himself tying his bundle to the nearest mount.
Arutha said, 'We move quickly, and I've no patience for
this. You may not come, Jimmy.'
Jimmy moved towards one of the mounts and nimbly
jumped up into the saddle. 'I don't take orders from
nameless adventurers and unemployed bravos. I'm the
Prince of Krondor's Squire.' He patted his bundle behind
the saddle and removed his rapier - the very one Arutha
had given him. "I'm ready. I've stolen enough horses to
be a fair rider. Besides, things seem to happen wherever
you are. It may get very dull around here without you.'
Arutha looked at Laurie, who said, 'Better bring him
along where we can watch him. He'll only follow behind
if we don't.' Arutha seemed about to protest when
Laurie said, "We can't call the palace guards to have him
arrested. '
Arutha mounted, obviously not pleased. Without
further conversation, they turned their horses and rode
away from the park. Down darkened alleys and narrow
streets they moved, riding at a moderate pace so as not
to attract undue attention. Jimmy said, 'This way lies the
eastern gate. I assumed we would leave by the north.'
Arutha said, 'We'll be heading north soon enough.
Should anyone see me leave the city, I'd just as soon
have word passed I've gone east.'
"Who's going to see us?' said Jimmy lightly, knowing

full well that anyone seen riding through the gate at this
hour would be noticed.
At the eastern gate two soldiers watched from the
gatehouse to see who passed, but as there was neither
curfew in effect nor alarm being sounded they barely
,stirred to watch the three riders pass.
Beyond the walls they were in the outer city, erected

when the ancient walls could no longer contain the
population. Leaving the main eastern roadway, they
moved between darkened buildings towards the north.
Then Arutha pulled up his horse and ordered Jimmy
and Laurie to do likewise.
 Coming around the corner
were four riders dressed in heavy black cloaks. Jimmy's
sword was out instantly, the chance of two groups of
travellers innocently happening across one another on
this minor street at this hour being very slight. Laurie
began to draw his also, but Arutha simply said, 'Put away
your weapons.'
When the riders closed, Jimmy and Laurie exchanged
questioning looks. 'Well met,' said Gardan as he turned
his horse to come alongside Arutha. "All is ready.'
'Good,' said Arutha. Studying the riders with Gardan,
he said, 'Three?'
Gardan's good-natured chuckle could be heard in the
gloom. 'As I hadn't seen him about for some time, I
thought Squire Jimmy might have decided to come along,
with or without your permission, so I took precautions.
Am I incorrect?'
'You are not, Captain,' said Arutha, taking no pains to
hide his displeasure.
'in any event, David here is your shortest guardsman,
and should any attempt pursuit, from a distance he will
resemble the boy.' He waved the three riders along and
they headed back down the street towards the eastern
road. Jimmy chuckled as they rode away, for one of the
guards had been a slender, dark-haired fellow and the
other a blond, bearded man with a lute over his back.
'The guards at the gate seemed to pay scant attention,'
said Arutha.
'Have no fears on that account, Highness. They're the
two biggest gossips in the night watch. Should word of
your departure leak from the palace, within hours the
entire city will know you were seen riding east. Those
three riders will continue on until they reach Darkmoor,
if they are not troubled before then. If I may suggest
we'd best be leaving at once.'

"We?' said Arutha.
'Orders, Sire. Princess Carline instructed me that
should any harm befall either of you' - he indicated
Laurie and Arutha - "I needn't return to Krondor.'
Sounding a note of mock injury, Jimmy said, "She said
nothing about me?'
The others ignored the remark. Arutha looked at
Laurie, who sighed deeply. "She had it figured out hours
before we left.' Gardan indicated that this was so.
"Besides, she can be circumspect when the occasion
warrants. Sometimes.'
Gardan added, "The Princess wouldn't betray her
brother or fiance.'
'Fiance?' said Arutha. "This has been a busy night.
Well, you would end up either driven from the palace or
married to her. But I'll never understand her taste in
men. Very well, it looks as if there's no getting rid of any
of you. Let's be off.'
' The three men and a boy spurred their mounts and
 resumed their ride and within minutes were through the
-outer city, heading north towards Sarth.

Near midday, the travellers rounded a bend in the coast
road to find a lone traveller sitting by the edge of the
King's Highway. He wore a hunter's outfit of green-dyed
leather. His dappled horse cropped grass a short way off
and he whittled at a piece of wood with his hunting knife.
Seeing the band approach, he put away his knife, tossed
the wood aside, and gathered up his belongings. He was
'cloaked and had his longbow over his shoulder when
Arutha reined in.
"Martin,' said Arutha in greeting.
The 'Duke of Crydee mounted. 'Took you a lot longer
to get here than I thought it would.'
Jimmy said, "Is there anyone in Krondor who doesn't
know the Prince has left?'
"Not so as you would notice,' answered Martin with a
smile. They commenced riding, and Martin said to
Arutha, "Lyam said to tell you he will lay as many false
trails as possible.'
Laurie said, 'The King knows?'
'Of course,' said Arutha. He indicated Martin. "The
three of us planned this from the start. Gardan had an
unusually large number of guards posted near the door to
my study when Lyam forbade my going.'
Martin added, 'Lyam has some of his personal guards
impersonating each of us. There's a long-faced fellow and
a blond, bearded lout impersonating Arutha and Laurie.'
With one of his rare grins he said, 'There's this handsome
brute of a man staying in my suite. Lyam's even managed
to borrow that tall, loud-voiced Master of Ceremonies
from the Keshian Ambassador. He's to sneak back into
the palace after the Keshians leave today. Fitted with a
false beard, he's a fair likeness for the captain here. At
least he's the right colour. He'll be seen popping up here
and there in the palace.' Gardan laughed.
'Then you've not attempted to leave unnoticed, in
truth,' said Laurie in admiration.
"No,' said Arutha. 'I seek to leave under a cloud of

confusion. We know whoever is behind this is sending
more assassins this way, or so Laughing Jack believed. So
if there are spies in Krondor, they'll not know for days
what is happening. When we are discovered out of the
palace, they'll be unsure of the direction taken. Only
those few with us when Pug ensorcelled Anita's suite
know we need to travel to Sarth.'
Jimmy laughed. 'A masterstroke of misdirection.
Should someone hear you've gone one way, then another,
they'll not know what to believe.'
Martin said, "Lyam was thorough. He has another
band dressed like you three heading down south towards
Stardock with Kulgan and Pug's family today. They'll be
just clumsy enough in hiding to be noticed.' To Arutha
he added, "pug says he will search for a cure for Anita in
Macros's library.'
Arutha reined in his horse and the others halted. 'We
are a half day's ride from the city. If we're not overtaken
by sundown, we can count ourselves free of pursuit. We
need then only worry about what may lie ahead.' He
paused, as if what he was about to say was difficult.
'Behind all the bantering words, you've chosen danger,
all of you.' He looked from face to faCe. "I count myself
fortunate for such friendship.'
Jimmy seemed the most embarrassed by the Prince's
words, but he fought back the urge to gulp. 'We have had
a vow in the Mockers. It's from an old proverb:
"You can't be sure the cat is dead until the cat is
skinned." When a difficult task lay ahead and a man
wished to let others know he was willing to stick it out to
the last, he'd say, "Until the cat is skinned."' He looked
at the others and said. 'Until the cat is skinned.'
Laurie said, "Until the cat is skinned,' and the statement
was quickly echoed by Gardan and Martin.
At the last, Arutha said, 'Thank you all.' He spurred
his horse forward and the others followed.
Martin fell in beside Laurie. 'What took you so long?'
'I was held up,' said Laurie. "It's somewhat complicated.
We're going to be married.'
"I know that. Gardan and I were waiting for Lyam
when he came back from your room. She could, I think,
do better.' Laurie's face betrayed his discomfort. Then
Martin smiled slightly as he added, 'But then, maybe she
couldn't.' Leaning over, he extended his hand. 'May you
always be happy.' After they shook, he said, "That still
doesn't account for the delay.'
'it's a bit delicate,' Laurie said, hoping his future
brother-in-law would let the matter drop.
Martin studied Laurie a long moment, then nodded in
understanding. 'A proper goodbye can take a while.'

9

Forest

A band of horsemen appeared on the horizon.
Black figures stood outlined against the reddish sky of
late afternoon. Martin sighted them first, and Arutha
ordered a halt. Since they had left Krondor, this was the
first band of travellers they had encountered obviously
not traders. Martin squinted. "I can't see much at this
distance, but I think them armed. Mercenaries perhaps?'
'Or outlaws,' Gardan said.
'Or something else,' Arutha added. 'Laurie, you're the
most travelled among us. Is there another way?'
Laurie looked about, getting his bearings. Pointing
towards the forest on the other side of a narrow strip of
farmland, he said, "to the east, about an hour's ride from
here, is an old trail that leads up into the Calastius
Mountains. It was used by miners once, but it's little
travelled now. It will lead us to the inland road.'
Jimmy said, 'Then we should make for that trail at
once. It seems those others have tired of waiting for us to
come to them. '
Arutha saw the riders on the horizon start in their
direction. 'Lead the way, Laurie.'
They left the road, heading for a series of low stone
walls that marked the farms' boundaries. "Look,' shouted
Jimmy.
Arutha's companions saw the other band had reacted
by spurring their mounts into a gallop. In the orange
glow of the late afternoon, they were black figures out-lined
against a grey-green hillside.
Arutha and the others took the first low stone wall in a
smooth jump, but Jimmy was nearly thrown. He managed
to right himself without losing too much ground on the
others. He said nothing but wished fervently there weren't
three more walls between himself and the forest. Some-
how he managed to keep seated and still not be too far
behind when Arutha's party entered the woods.
The others were waiting for him and he reined in.
Laurie pointed. 'They can't overtake us, so they parallel
us, hoping to intercept us north of here.' Then he laughed.
'This trail is north-east bound, so our nameless friends
will have to travel an additional mile of brush-clogged
woodlands to cut our trail. We'll be long past them when
they do. If they can find the trail.'
Arutha said, "We still must hurry. We've little light,
and the woods are not safe at the best of times. How long
to this road?'
'We should be there two hours after sunset, maybe a
little sooner.'
Arutha motioned for him to lead the way. Laurie
turned his horse and they all moved deeper into the
rapidly darkening forest.

Dark boles bulked on both sides. In the gloom, with
scant illumination from middle and large moons glitering
down through high branches, the woods seemed a surrounding
solid. Throughout the night they had been
picking their way along what Laurie insisted was a trail,
some ethereal thing that suddenly appeared a few feet
before Laurie's horse and just as quickly vanished a few
feet behind Jimmy's. To Jimmy one patch of ground
looked much like another, except that the meandering
way Laurie chose seemed to have slightly less debris
cluttering it. The boy constantly looked back over his
shoulder, seeking signs of pursuit.
Arutha ordered a halt. 'We've seen no signs of being
followed. Perhaps we've shaken them.'
Martin dismounted. "Not likely. If they have a skilled
tracker among them, they've found our spoor. They'll be
moving as slowly as we are, but they'll be keeping pace.'
Dismounting, Arutha said, "We'll rest here for a while.
Jimmy, break out the oats behind Laurie's saddle.'
Jimmy grumbled slightly as he began caring for the
horses. He had learned after his first night on the road
that, as Squire, he was expected to care for his liege's
horse - and everyone else's as well.
Martin shouldered his bow and said, "I think I'll backtrack'
a ways and see if there's anyone close. I'll be back
within the hour. Should anything happen, don't wait for
me. I'll find you at the Ishapian abbey tomorrow night.'
He slipped off into the gloom.
Arutha sat on his saddle, while Jimmy set about caring
for the horses, with assistance from Laurie. Gardan kept
a vigil, scanning the murk of the forest.
Time passed and Arutha became lost in thought. Jimmy
watched him from the corner of' his eye. Laurie caught
Jimmy studying Arutha in the dim light and moved
alongside the boy, helping him brush down Gardan's
horse. The singer whispered, 'You worry about him.'
Jimmy only nodded, a gesture almost lost in the dark.
Then he said, 'I don't have a family, singer, or a lot of
friends. He's . . . important. Yes, I worry.'
When he was finished, Jimmy crossed to where Arutha
sat staring off into the blackness. 'The horses are fed and
groomed.'
Arutha seemed pulled from his brooding. "Good. Now
get some rest. We'll move out at first light.' He glanced
about. 'Where's Martin?'
Jimmy looked back along the trail. 'He's still back
there somewhere.'
Arutha followed his gaze.

Jimmy settled in, his head on his saddle, a blanket
pulled about him. He stared off into the darkness for a
long time before sleep came.
Something woke Jimmy. Two figures approached and
Jimmy made ready to leap to his feet when he saw
they were Martin and Gardan. Then Jimmy remembered
Gardan had remained on watch. They reached the small
campsite, both walking quietly.
Jimmy roused the others. Arutha wasted no time when
he saw his brother had returned. '"Did you find any sign
of pursuit!'
Martin nodded. 'A few miles back along the trail. A
band of . . . men, moredhel, I don't know which. Their
fire was low. One at least is a moredhel. Save that one,
to a man they were dressed in black armour, with long
black capes. Each wore a strange helm that covered the
entire head. I didn't need any more to decide they were
not likely to prove friendly. I cut a false trail across ours.
It should lead them away for a while, but we should be
off at once.'
"What of this one moredhel? You say he wasn't attired

like the others?'
'No, and he was the biggest damn moredhel I've ever
seen, barechested except for a leather jerkin. His head
was shaved save for a long scalp lock that was tied so it
hung behind like a horse's tail. I could see him clearly in
the firelight. I've never seen his like, though I've heard of
his sort.'
Laurie said, 'Yabon mountain clan.'
Arutha looked at the singer. Laurie explained, "When
I was growing up near Tyr-Sog, we'd hear of raids bY the
northern mountain clans. They're different from the
forest dwellers. The topknot of hair says he's also a
chieftain, an important one.'
Gardan said, 'He's come a long way.'
"Yes, and it means some new order has been established

since the Riftwar. We knew that many of those driven
north by the Tsurani were seeking to join their kin in the
Northlands, but now it seems they've brought some of
their cousins back with them.'
"Or,' said Arutha, "it means they're under his
command.' Martin said,
"For that to have happened . . .'
'Alliance, a moredhel alliance. Something we've always
feared,' said Arutha. "Come, it's almost light, and We
won't puzzle this out any better for standing still.'
They readied their horses, and soon they were back on
the Forest Road, the major inland road between Krondor
and the north. Few caravans used it, while it was a timesaver,
most travellers chose to travel through Krondor
'and up the coast, as that was the safer route. Laurie
claimed they were now riding even with the Bay of Ships,
about a day's ride from the Ishapian abbey at Sarth. The
town of Sarth rested on a peninsula at the north end of
the bay. The abbey was in the hills to the northeast of the
town, so they'd intercept the road between the abbey and
the town. If they pushed, they would reach the abbey
just after sundown. Out in the forest there was no hint of danger, but

Martin judged it likely the moredhel-led band was
coming. He could hear subtle changes in the early morning
sounds of the forest behind that told him something
not too distant was disturbing the natural order of things
in its passing. Martin rode beside Arutha, behind Laurie. "I think I

might drop back and see if our friends still follow.'
Jimmy hazarded a glance over his shoulder, and
through the trees behind he could see black-clad figures
following. "Too late. they've seen us!' he shouted.
Arutha's party spurred their mounts forward, the thunder
of hooves echoing through the trees. All bent low
over the necks of their mounts, and Jimmy kept glancing
back. They were putting distance between themselves
and the black riders, for which Jimmy gave silent thanks.
After a few minutes of hard riding, they came to a
deep defile, impossible for horses to jump. Across it
stood a sturdy wooden bridge. They sped over it, then
Arutha reined in. "Stand here!' they turned their horses,
for the sound of pursuit could be heard.
Arutha was about to order them to ready a charge
when Jimmy leapt off his horse. He pulled his bundle
from behind his saddle. Running to the end of the bridge
he knelt. Arutha shouted, 'What are you doing?'
Jimmy's only answer was 'Keep back!'
In the distance the' sound of approaching horses grew
louder. Martin leapt down from his mount and unshouldered
his longbow. He had it strung and an arrow nocked
when the first of the black riders came into view. Without
hesitation he loosed the cloth-yard shaft, and without
error it flew, striking the black-armoured figure full in the
chest with the thundering force only a longbow could
deliver at such a distance. The rider was propelled backwards
out of his saddle. The second horseman avoided
the fallen man, but a third was thrown as his mount
stumbled over the body.
Arutha moved forwards to intercept the second rider,
who was about to cross the bridge. "No!' shouted Jimmy.
'Keep back!' Suddenly the boy was dashing away from
the bridge as the black rider crossed. The horseman was
almost upon the spot where Jimmy had knelt when a
loud whooshing noise sounded, accompanied by a large
cloud of smoke. His horse shied and spun on the narrow
bridge, then reared up. The animal stumbled back a step,
its rump striking the rails of the bridge. The black-clad
warrior was tossed backwards over the rail while his horse
pawed the air, then he fell, hitting the rocks below the
bridge with an audible thud. The horse turned and fled
back the way it had come.
Arutha's and the others' horses were far enough away
from the explosion of smoke not to panic, though Laurie
had to ride forward and quickly grab the reins of Jimmy's
mount while Gardan held Martin's. The bowman was
busy shooting at the approaching riders, whose animals
bucked and shied as their masters fought to bring them
back under control.
Jimmy was now racing back towards the bridge, a small
flask in his hands. He pulled a stopper from its end and
tossed it at the smoke. Suddenly the near end of the

bridge erupted in flames. The black riders pulled up,
their horses nickering at sight of the flames. The balking
animals rode in circles as their riders sought to force
them across the bridge.
Jimmy stumbled away from the blaze. Gardan swore,
'Look, the fallen ones rise!'
Through the smoke and flame they could see the rider
with the arrow in his chest staggering towards the bridge,
while another that Martin had felled was slowly rising to
his feet.
Jimmy reached his horse and mounted. Arutha said,
'What was all that?'
'The smoke bomb I carry out of habit. Many of the
Mockers use them to cover escape and create confusion.
They make a little fire and a great deal of smoke.'
'What was in the flask?' asked Laurie.
'Distillation of naphtha. I know an alchemist in
Krondor who sells it to farmers to start fires when they
slash and burn.'
"That's damned dangerous stuff to be toting around,'
said Gardan. dO you always carry it?'
"No,' said Jimmy as he mounted. 'But then I usually
don't travel where i'm likely to run into things you
can only stop by roasting. After that business at the
whorehouse I thought it might come in handy. I have one
more in my bundle.'
'Then toss it!' shouted Laurie. "The bridge's not caught

yet.'
Jimmy pulled out the other flask and nudged his horse
forward. With careful aim he tossed the flask into the
fire.
Flames rose up, ten, twelve feet in height, as the
wooden bridge became engulfed. On both sides of the
defile horses whinnied and tried to run as the fire rose
higher and higher in the sky.
Arutha looked across the bridge at the enemy horsemen,
who now sat patiently waiting for the flames to
burn out. From behind them another figure rode into
view, the unarmoured moredhel with the scalp lock. He
sat watching Arutha and the others, no expression evident
'on his face. Arutha could feel blue eyes boring into his
soul. And he felt hate. Here, then, for the first time he
saw his enemy, saw one of those who had harmed Anita.
Martin began shooting at the black riders, and with a
silent signal the unarmoured moredhel led his companions
back into the trees.
Martin mounted and came to his brother's side. Arutha
watched as the moredhel vanished into the trees. Arutha
said, "He knows me. We were so clever, and they knew
where I was all along.'
'But how?' asked Jimmy. 'There were so many
diversions. '
"Some black art,' said Martin. "There are powers at
play here, Jimmy.'
'Come,' said Arutha. "They'll be back. This will not
stop them. We've gained only a little time.'
Laurie led the way towards the northbound road to
Sarth. They did not look back as the fire crackled loudly.

For the rest of that day they rode nearly continuously. Of
their pursuers they saw nothing, but Arutha knew they
were close behind. Near sundown, light fog filled the air
.as they neared the coast again, where the Bay of Ships
turned the road eastwards. According to Laurie, they
would reach the abbey after sundown.
Martin moved up to ride next to Gardan and Arutha,
who stared out into the shadows, absently directing his
horse. 'Remembering the past?'
Arutha looked at his brother thoughtfully. "Simpler
times, Martin. Just remembering simpler times. I rage to
be done with this mystery of Silverthorn and have Anita
returned to me. I burn for it!' He spoke with sudden
passion. With a sigh, his voice softened as he said, 'I was
wondering what Father would have done in my place.'
Martin glanced at Gardan. The captain said, "Exactly
what you're doing now, Arutha. Man and boy I knew
Lord Borric, and I'll say there's not another more like
him in temper than you. All of you are like him: Martin
in the way he watches things closely. Lyam reminds me
of him when the lighter moods were upon him, before he
lost his lady Catherine. '
Arutha asked, 'And I?'
It was Martin who answered. "Why, you think like
him, little brother, more than Lyam or I do. I'm your
eldest brother. I don't take orders from you only because
you wear the title Prince to my Duke. I follow your lead
because, more than any man I've known since Father,
you make the right choices.'
Arutha's gaze was distant as he said, "Thank you. That
is high praise.' A sound came from the trail behind, just loud enough

to be heard without being identified. Laurie tried to lead
as quickly as he could, but the dark and fog confounded
his sense of direction. The sun was close to setting, so
little light penetrated the deep woods. He could see
only a small part of the trail in front of him, twice he' was

forced to slow down to separate the true trail from false
ones. Arutha rode up beside and said, 'Keep it steady,
Better to continue at a crawl than halt.'
Gardan fell back next to Jimmy. The boy peered into
the woods, seeking a glimpse of whatever might be hiding
just behind the boles of the trees, but only wisps of grey
fog in the last light of the setting sun could be seen.
Then a horse came crashing from out of the brush, one
moment not there, the next nearly knocking Jimmy from
the saddle. The boy's horse spun in a full circle as the
black-armoured warrior pushed past. Gardan swung a
late blow at the horseman and missed.
Arutha shouted, "This way.' and tried to force his way
past another horseman cutting across the trail. He faced
the rider, the unarmoured moredhel. For the first time
Arutha could see the three scars cut into each of the
Dark Brother's cheeks. Time froze for an instant as
the two confronted one another. There was a strange
recognition in Arutha, for here was his enemy made
flesh. No longer did he struggle with unseen assassins'
hands in the dark or mystic powers without substance,
here was someone he could vent his rage upon. Without
sound the moredhel swung a vicious blow at Arutha's
head, and the Prince avoided being decapitated only by
ducking over the neck of his horse. Arutha lashed out
with his rapier and felt its point dig in. He came up and
saw he had taken the moredhel in the face, cutting deeply
across the scarred cheek. But the creature only moaned,
a strange tortured sound, half gurgle, half strangled cry.
Then Arutha realized the moredhel possessed no tongue.
The creature looked at Arutha for a brief moment and
turned his horse away.
'Try to break free.' shouted Arutha, spurring his own
horse forward. Suddenly Arutha was away, the others
behind.
For an instant it seemed the moredhel-led company
was too shocked to react to the break, but then the
pursuit began. Of all the mad rides in Arutha's life,
this one stood out as the maddest. Through the forest,
shrouded with fog and night's black cloak, they dashed
among trees, following a road little wider than a path.
Laurie passed Arutha, taking the lead.
For long minutes they raced through the woods, somehow
avoiding the certainly fatal error of leaving the
roadway. Then Laurie was shouting, 'The road to the
abbey!'
Slow to react, Arutha and the others behind Laurie
barely made the turn onto a larger road. As they steered
their mounts onto the new path, they could see the faint
large moon rising. Then they were out of the woods, racing down a well

travelled road passing through farmlands. Their horses
were lathered and panting, and they spurred them on to
more heroic efforts, for while the black riders were not
gaining on them, they were not falling behind either.
They sped through the dark, climbing upwards, as the
road rose out of the gentle hills around a plateau that
dominated the valley farmlands near the coast. The road
narrowed and they strung out along it in single file ,
Martin pulling in until the others were past.
The trail became treacherous and they were forced to
slow, but so were those behind. Arutha dug his heels into
his horse's sides, but the animal had given all it had left
to climb this road.
The evening air was heavy with haze and unseasonably
cold. The hills were widely spaced, lazy rolling ridges
that gently rose and fell. The highest could be climbed in
less than an hour. All were covered in wild grasses and
brush, but they were free from trees, for this had been
farm' land.
The abbey at Sarth sat atop a high, craggy place, a
small mountain rather than a hill, an upthrust thing of
rock and granite facings, flat on top like a table.
Gardan looked downwards as they hurried up the side
of the mount and said, 'i'd not want to storm this place,
Highness. You could hold this road with six grandmothers
wielding brooms . . . forever.'
Jimmy looked back but couldn't see their pursuers in
the gloom. "So tell those grannies to get back there and
slow down the black riders,' he shouted.
Arutha looked behind, expecting to be overtaken by
black riders at any second. They rounded a curve and
followed the road upwards to the summit. Suddenly they
stood before the arched entrance to the abbey.

Beyond the wall a tower of some sort could be seen in
the moonlight. Arutha pounded on the gates and shouted,
'Hello! We seek aid.' Then all heard what they had
waited for, the pounding of horses' hooves upon the hard
road. Drawing weapons, Arutha's party turned to face
those who followed.
. The black riders rounded the curve before the abbey
gates, and the battle was again joined. Arutha ducked
and parried as he tried to protect himself. The attackers
seemed possessed of unusual frenzy, as if there was a
need to quickly dispatch Arutha and his party. The scarfaced
moredhel nearly rode over Jimmy's mount to reach
Arutha, his disregard for the boy being the only reason
Jimmy survived. The Dark Brother headed straight for
Arutha. Gardan, Laurie, and Martin all strove to keep
the black riders at bay, but they were on the verge of
being overwhelmed at last.
Suddenly it was light on the road. As if full daylight
multiplied ten-fold had burst forth in the gloom, a dazling
brilliance surrounded the combatants. Arutha and
the others were forced to cover their eyes, which watered
from the blinding light. They could hear muffled moans
from the black-clad figures around them, then the sound
of bodies hitting the ground. Arutha peeked through
narrowed lids behind his upraised hand and saw enemy
horsemen falling stiffly from their saddles. The exceptions
were the unarmoured moredhel, who shielded his eyes
against the sudden light, and three of the armoured
riders. With a single motion the mute rider waved his
three companions away and they turned and fled down
the road. As soon as the black riders were out of sight,
the brilliant light began to diminish.
Arutha wiped tears from his eyes and began to pursue
but Martin shouted, "Stop. Should you overtake them
it's your death. here we have allies!' Arutha reined in
loath to lose his opponent. He returned to where the
others stood rubbing their eyes. Martin dismounted and
knelt over a fallen black rider. He pulled off a helm and
quickly stood away. "It's a moredhel, and it smells as if
it's been dead for some time.' He pointed at its chest.
"This is one I killed at the bridge. My broken arrow is

still in its chest.'
Arutha looked at the building. "That light is gone.
Whoever our unseen benefactor is, he must feel we no
longer need it.' The gates in the wall before them slowly
began to open. Martin handed the helm up for Arutha's
inspection. It was a strange thing, fashioned with a dragon
carved in bas-relief on top, its downswept wings covering
the sides. Two narrow slits provided vision for the wearer,
and four small holes allowed him to breathe. Arutha
tossed the helm back to Martin. "That's an ill-aspected
piece of ironmongery. Bring it along. Now let's visit this
abbey.'
'Abbey,' Gardan observed as they entered. 'it looks
more like a fortress.' Tall, iron-banded heavy wooden
gates straddled the roadway. To the right a stone wall a
dozen feet high stretched away, appearing to run to the
other edge of the mountaintop. To the left the wall
receded, facing upon a vertical drop over a hundred feet
to a switchback in the roadway below. Behind the wall
they could see a single tower, several floors high. 'if that
isn't an old-style keep tower, I've never seen one,' said
the captain. 'i'd not want to storm this abbey, Highness.
It's the most defensible position I've seen. Look, there's
not five feet of clearing between the wall and cliff anywhere.'
He sat back in the saddle, in obvious appreciation
of the military aspects of the abbey's design.
Arutha spurred his horse forward. The gates were now
open' , and, seeing no reason not to, Arutha led his
companions onto the grounds of the Ishapian abbey at
Sarth.

10

Sarth

The abbey appeared deserted.
The courtyard reflected what they had seen from the
road. This had once been as a fortress. Around the
ancient tower a larger single-storey keep building had
been added, as well as two outbuildings that could be
seen peeking from behind it. One appeared to be a
stable. But before them no sign of movement could be
seen.
'Welcome to Ishap's Abbey at Sarth,' came a voice
from behind one of the gates.
Arutha had his sword halfway from its scabbard before
the speaker added, 'You have nothing to fear.'
The speaker stepped from behind the gate. Arutha put
away his weapon. As the others dismounted, the Prince
studied the man. He was stocky, of middle years, short,
With a youthful smile. His brown hair was cut close and
ragged and his face was clean-shaven. He wore a simple
brown robe gathered around the waist with a single
leather thong. A pouch and some manner of holy symbol
hung at his waist. He was unarmed, but Arutha got the
impression that the man moved like one who had been

trained in arms. Finally
Arutha said, 'I am Arutha, Prince
of Krondor.'
The man looked amused, though he didn't smile. 'Then
welcome to Ishap's Abbey at Sarth, Highness.'
'You mock me?'
"No, Highness. We of the Order of Ishap maintain
little contact with the outside world, and few visit with
us, let alone royalty. Please forgive any insult, if your
honour permits, for none was intended.'
Arutha dismounted and, fatigue in his voice, said, "it is
I who asks forgiveness . . . .
'Brother Dominic, but please, no apologies. It is clear
from the circumstances of your arrival you were hardpressed.'
Martin said, 'Do we have you to thank for that mystic

light?' The monk nodded. Arutha said, "There seems a great

deal to speak of, Brother Dominic.'
'There are many questions. You'll have to wait upon
the Father Abbot's pleasure for most answers, Highness
Come, I'll show you to the stable.'
Arutha's impatience wouldn't let him wait a moment
longer. "I came on a matter of the utmost urgency. I need
to speak with your Abbot. Now.'
The monk spread his hands in a gesture indicating it
was outside his authority to decide. "The Father Abbot is
unavailable for another two hours. He is meditating and
praying in the chapel, with the others of our order, which
is why I alone am here to greet you. Please, come with
me.' Arutha seemed ready to protest,, but Martin's hand

upon his shoulder settled him. "Again, I am sorry, Brother
Dominic. We are, of course, guests.'
Dominic's expression indicated that Arutha's temper
was a matter of no consequence. He led them to the
second of the smaller buildings behind what was once a
central keep. It was indeed a stable. The sole occupants
at the moment were another horse and a stout little
donkey, which cast an indifferent eye upon the newcomers.
As they tended their animals, Arutha spoke of
their trials over the last few weeks. When he finished, he
said, "How did you manage to confound the black riders?'
'My title is Keeper of the Gates, Highness. I may admit
any to the abbey, but no one with evil intent can cross
the portals without my leave. Once upon the grounds of
this abbey, those who sought your life became subject to
my power. They took a risk attacking you so close to the
abbey. It was a risk that proved deadly to their cause.
But further conversation on this and other subjects must
wait upon the Father Abbot.'
Martin said, "if everyone else is at chapel, you'll need
some help disposing of those corpses. They have an
irritating habit of coming back to life.'
'I thank you for the offer, but I can manage. And they
will remain dead. The magic employed to topple them
cleansed them of the controlling evil. Now you must rest.'
They left the stable and the monk led them to what
appeared to be a barracks. Gardan said, 'This place has a
martial look to it, brother.'
Entering a long room with a single row of beds, the
monk said, "In ancient times this fortress was home to a
robber baron. The Kingdom and Kesh lay far enough
away for him to be a law unto himself, pillaging, raping,
and robbing without fear of retribution. After some time
he was turned out by the people of the surrounding
towns, made bold by his tyranny. The lands below this
escarpment were given over to farming, but so deep was
their hatred of the baron that this keep stood abandoned.
When a mendicant friar of our Order of Wanderers
discovered this place, he sent word back to the temple in
the city of Kesh. When we sought the use of this place as
an abbey, the descendants of those who had turned out
the Baron had no objection. Today only those of us who
serve here remember the history of this place. To those
in the towns and villages along the Bay of Ships this has
always been the Abbey of Ishap at Sarth.'
Arutha said, 'I assume this was once a barracks.'
Dominic said, "Yes, Highness. We now use it as an
infirmary and a place for occasional guests. Make yourselves
comfortable, for I must be about my own tasks
The Father Abbot will see you shortly.'
Dominic left and Jimmy fell onto one of the beds with
an audible sigh. Martin inspected a small stove at one
end of the room and found it lit, with the makings for tea
next to it. He immediately set a pot to boil. Under a
cloth he found bread, cheese, and fruit, which he passed
around. Laurie sat examining his lute for possible travel
damage and began tuning it. Gardan sat down opposite
the Prince.
Arutha sighed long and deeply. "i am on a ragged
edge. I fear these monks will have no knowledge of this
Silverthorn.' For an instant his eyes betrayed his anguish,
then he again showed only an impassive expression.
Martin cocked his head to one side as he thought
aloud. "Tully seems to think they know a great deal.'
Laurie put up his lute. 'Whenever I've found myself
close to magic, priestly or otherwise, there also I've found
trouble.'
Jimmy spoke to Laurie. 'That Pug seemed a friendly
enough fellow for a magician. I wanted to speak to
him more, but . . .' He left unsaid the events that had
prevented it. 'There's little about him that seems remarkable,
but the Tsurani seem to fear him, and some of the
court whisper about him.'
"There is a saga begging to be sung,' answered Laurie.

He told Jimmy of Pug's captivity and rise among the
Tsurani. 'Those who practise arcane arts on Kelewan are
a law unto themselves, and whatsoever they command is
done without hesitation. There is nothing like them on
this world. That is why the Tsurani in LaMut hold him in
awe. Old habits die hard.'
Jimmy said, 'He gave up a great deal to return, then.'
Laurie laughed. "That wasn't entirely a matter of
choice. '
Jimmy said, "What's Kelewan like?"
Laurie spun a rich and colourful story of his adventures
on that world, with the eye for detail that lay at the heart
of his craft, as much as did good voice and playing skills.
The others settled in, relaxing and drinking their tea
while listening. They all knew the story of Laurie and
Pug and their part in the Riftwar, but each time Laurie
told the story it was again a riveting adventure, one with
the great legends.
When Laurie finished, Jimmy said, 'it would be an
adventure to go to Kelewan.'
"That is not possible,' observed Gardan, 'i'm glad to

say. '
Jimmy said, "If it was done once, why not again?'
Martin said, "Arutha, you were with Pug when Kulgan
read Macros's letter explaining why he closed the rift.'
Arutha said, "Rifts are wild things, spanning some
impossible no-place between worlds, possibly across time
as 'well. But something about them makes it possible to
know where they're going to come out. When one is
fashioned, then others seem to "follow" it, coming out in
the same general area. But that first one is the one you
can't control. That's as much as I understand. You'd
have to ask Kulgan or Pug for more details.'
Gardan said, "Ask Pug. If you ask Kulgan, you'll get a
lecture. '
"So Pug and Macros closed down the first one to end
the war?' said Jimmy.
'And more,' said Arutha.
Jimmy looked around the room, sensing they all knew
something he was not privy to. Laurie said, "According to
Pug, there was in ancient times a vast evil power known
to the Tsurani only as the Enemy. Macros said it would
find its way to the two worlds if the rift was left open,
drawn to it as steel to a lodestone. It was a being of
awesome strength that had destroyed armies and humbled
mighty magicians. Or at least that is what Pug explained.'
Jimmy cocked his head to one side. "This Pug is that
important a magician, then?'
Laurie laughed. "To hear Kulgan tell it, Pug is the most
powerful practicer of the magic arts there is since Macros's
death. And he's cousin to the Duke and the Prince, and
the King.'
Jimmy's eyes widened. 'it's true,' said Martin. "Our
father adopted Pug into our family.'
Martin said, "Jimmy, you speak of magicians as if
you've never had dealings with one.'
'I know better. There are a few spellcasters in Krondor,
and they tend to be a questionable lot. There was once
among the Mockers a thief known as the Grey Cat, for
his stealth was unmatched. He was given to bold theft
and filched some bauble from a magician who viewed the
deed with considerable disfavour.'
"What became of him?' asked Laurie.
"He's now the grey cat.'

The four listeners sat quietly for a moment, then
comprehension dawned and Gardan, Laurie, and Martin
burst into laughter. Even Arutha smiled at the joke and
shook his head in amusement.
Conversation continued on, easy and relaxed, as the
band of travellers felt secure for the first time since
leaving Krondor.
The bells sounded from the main building and a monk
entered. Silently he motioned for them to come. Arutha
said, "We're to follow you?' The monk nodded. 'To see
the Abbot?' Again the monk nodded.
Arutha was off his bed, all fatigue forgotten. He was
the first out of the door behind the monk.
The Abbot's chamber befitted one given to a life of
spiritual contemplation. It was austere in every aspect.
But what was surprising about it was the bookshelves
upon the walls, dozens of volumes at every hand. The
Abbot, Father John, seemed a kindly man of advancing
years, slender and ascetic in appearance. His grey hair
and beard showed in stark contrast to dark skin that
was lined and wrinkled like carefully carved mahogany.
Behind him stood two men, Brother Dominic and one
Brother Anthony, a tiny stooped-shouldered fellow of
indeterminate age, who constantly squinted at the Prince.
The Abbot smiled, his eyes crinkly at the corners, and
Arutha was suddenly put in mind of paintings of Old
Father Winter, a mythical figure who gave sweets to
children at the Midwinter's Festival. In a deep, youthful
voice the Abbot said, 'Welcome to Ishap's Abbey, Highness.
How may we help you?'
Arutha quickly outlined the history of the last few
weeks.
The Abbot's smile vanished as Arutha's story unfolded.
When the Prince was finished, the Abbot said, 'Highness,
we are gravely troubled to hear of this necromancy at the
palace. But as to the tragedy that has befallen your
Princess, how may we aid you?'
Arutha found himself reluctant to speak, as if at the
last his fear of there being no aid overwhelmed him.
Sensing his brother's reticence, Martin said, (A conspirator
to the assassination attempt claims a moredhel gave
him the poison used, one prepared with arcane skills. He
called the substance Silverthorn.'
The Abbot sat back, sympathy evident in his
expression. 'Brother Anthony?'
The little man said, 'Silverthorn? I'll begin looking in
the archives at once, father.' With a shuffling step, he quickly
departed the Abbot's chambers. Arutha and the others watched the bent
figure leave the room. Arutha asked, 'How long will it take?'
The Abbot said, 'That depends. Brother Anthony has
a remarkable ability to pull facts seemingly from out of
the air, remembering things read once in passing a decades
before. That is why he has risen to the rank of Head
Archivist, our Keeper of Knowledge. But the search
could take days.'
Arutha clearly didn't understand what the Abbot was
speaking about, and the old priest said, 'Brother Dominic,
why don't you show the Prince and his companions a
little of what we do here at Sarth?' the Abbot rose and
bowed slightly to the Prince as Dominic moved towards
the door. 'Then bring him to the base of the tower. ' He
added to Arutha, "I will meet with you shortly, Highness.
They followed the monk out into the main hall of the
abbey. Dominic said, 'This way.' He led them through a
door, then down a flight of stairs to a landing from which
four passages branched off. He took them past a series of
doors. As they walked, he said, 'This hill is unlike those
around, as you must have noticed when you rode here. It
is mostly solid rock. When the first monks came to Sarth,
they discovered these tunnels and chambers underneath
the keep. '
'What are they?' asked Jimmy.
They came to a door and Dominic produced a large
ring of keys, which he used to open the heavy lock. The
door swung open ponderously, and after they had stepped
through, he closed it behind. 'The original robber baron
used these excavations as storage rooms, against siege
and to hoard booty. He must have grown lax in his
defence for the villagers to have laid successful siege.
there is enough room here for stores to last years. We
have added to them until the entire hill is honeycombed
with vaults and passages.'
"To what end?' asked Arutha.

Dominic indicated they should follow him through
another door, this one unlocked. They entered a large
vaulted chamber, with shelving along the walls and freestanding
shelves in the centre of the room. Each shelf
was packed solid with books. Dominic crossed to one and
took down a book. He handed it to Arutha.
Arutha studied the old volume. It had faded gilt lettering
burned into the binding. There was a faint resistance
when Arutha carefully opened it, as if it had not been
handled in years. On the first page he saw alien letters of
an unknown language, painstakingly lettered in a stiff
script. He lifted the book before his face and sniffed at it.
There was a faint, pungent odour on the pages.
As Arutha handed the book back, Dominic said, "Preservative.
Every book here has been treated to prevent
deterioration.' He gave the book to Laurie.
The widely travelled singer said, "I don't speak this
tongue, but I think it Keshian, though it is unlikely any
scribing of the Empire's I know.'
Dominic smiled. 'The book is from the south part of
Great Kesh, near the border of the Keshian Confederacy.
It is the diary of a slightly mad but otherwise insignificant
noble from a minor dynasty, written in a language called
Low Delkian. High Delkian, as best we can ascertain,
was a secret language limited to priests of some obscure
order.'
"What is this place?' asked Jimmy.

'We who serve Ishap at Sarth gather together books,
tomes, manuals, scrolls, and parchments, even fragments.
In our order there is a saying: "'Those at Sarth serve the
hole Knowledge", which is not far from the truth. Whenever
one of our order finds a scrap of writing, it or a copy
is eventually sent here. In this chamber, and in every
other chamber under the , abbey, are shelves like these. All are filled,
even to the point of being crowded from
floor to ceiling, and new vaults are constantly being dug.
From the top of the hill to the lowest level there are over
a thousand chambers like this one. Each houses several
hundred volumes or more. Some of the larger vaults hold
several thousand. At last tally we were approaching a
half-'million works.' Arutha was stunned. His own library, inherited with

the throne of Krondor, numbered less than a thousand.
"How long have you been gathering these?'
"over three centuries. There are many of our order

who do nothing but travel and buy any scrap they can
find, or who pay to have copies made. Some are ancient,
others are in languages unknown, and three are from
another world, having been obtained from the Tsurani in
LaMut. There are arcane works, auguries and manuals of
power, hidden from the eyes of all but a few of the most
 highly placed in our order.' He looked about the room,
'And with all this, there is still so much we don't
understand. '
Gardan said, "How do you keep track of it all?'
Dominic said, 'We have brothers whose sole task is
to catalogue these works, all working under Brother
Anthony's direction. Guides are prepared and constantly

updated. In the building above us and in another room
deep below are shelves of nothing but guides. Should you
need a work on a subject, you can find it in the guides. It
will list the work by vault number - we are standing in
vault seventeen - shelf number, and space number upon
the shelf. We are attempting to cross-index each work by
author, when known, and title as well as subject. The
work goes slowly and will take all of another century.'
Arutha was again overwhelmed by the sheer size of
such an undertaking. 'But against what ends do you store
all these works?'
Dominic said, 'in the first, for the sake of knowledge
itself. But there is a second cause, which I will leave for
the Abbot to explain. Come, let us join him.'
Jimmy was the last through the door, and he cast a
rearward glance at the books in the room. He left with
the feeling that he was somehow gaining a glimpse of
worlds and ideas heretofore unimagined, and he regretted
he would never fully understand most of what lay beneath
the abbey. He felt somehow lessened for this realization.
For the first time, Jimmy felt his world a small one, with
a much larger yet to be discovered.

Arutha and his companions waited for the Abbot in the
large chamber. Several torches threw flickering illumination
upon the walls. Another door opened and the
Abbot entered, followed by two men. Brother DominiC
was the first through, but the other was unknown to
Arutha. He was an old man, large and still erect in his
bearing, who despite his robes seemed to resemble a
soldier more than a monk, an impression heightened by a
war hammer hanging from his belt. His grey-shot black
hair had been left to grow to shoulder length but, like his
beard, it was neatly trimmed. The Abbot said, "It is time
for plain speaking.'
Arutha said with a bitter edge, 'That would be
appreciated. '
The unnamed monk broke into a broad grin. 'You've
your father's gift for blunt speech, Arutha.'
Arutha studied the man again, surprised by his tone.
Then recognition struck. It had been more than ten years
since he had seen this man. 'Dulanic!'
'No longer, Arutha. Now I'm simply Brother Micah,
Defender of the Faith. . .which means I crack heads for
,ishap now as I used to for your cousin Erland.' He patted
the hammer at his waist.
We thought you dead.' Duke Dulanic, former Knight-
Marshal of Krondor, had vanished when Guy du Bas-Tyra
had assumed the viceroyalty over Krondor during
the last year of the Riftwar.
The man called Micah seemed surprised. "I thought
everyone knew. With Guy on the throne of Krondor and
Erland near death from coughing sickness, I feared civil
war. I retired from office rather than face your father in
the field or betray my King, two unthinkable choices. But
I made my retirement no secret.'
Arutha said, 'With Lord Barry dead, it was assumed
you'd both fallen by Guy's hand. No one knew what had
become of you.'
"Strange. Barry died of a seizure of the heart and I
informed du Bas-Tyra of my intention to take holy vows
His man Radburn stood at his side when I gave my
resignation. '
Martin said, 'That would explain it, then. With Jocko
Radburn drowned off the Keshian coast and Guy banished
from the Kingdom, who would have the truth to
tell?'
The Abbot spoke. "Brother Micah came to us a
troubled man, called by some agency of Ishap to our
service. We tested him and found him worthy, so that
now his former life as a noble of the Kingdom is a thing
of the past. But I asked him here because he is both a
valued adviser and a man of military skills who may help
us understand what forces move in the world these days.'
"Well enough. Now, what business have we besides

finding a cure to Anita's injury?'
'The understanding of that which brought her to injury.
that which seeks to end your days, for a start,' answered
Micah.
Arutha looked slightly abashed. 'Of course, forgive mY
preoccupation. I would welcome anything that made
sense out of the madness my life has become over the last
month. '
The Abbot said, "Brother Dominic has shown you
something of our works here. He may have mentioned
that we count many auguries and other works by prophets
in our collection. Some are as reliable as a child's moods,
which is to say not at all. But a few, a very few, are true
works of those whom Ishap has given the gift of future
seeing. In several of these volumes, among the most
ancient we possess, a reference is made to a sign in the
sky.
'There is, we fear, a power now loose in the world
What it may be and how it may be combatted are yet
unknown to us. But this is certain: it is a fell power, and
at the end either it shall be destroyed or it shall destroy
us. That is inescapable.' Pointing upwards, the Abbot
said, 'The tower above us has been converted to study
the stars, planets, and moons, using clever devices built
for us by some of the more talented artificers in the
Kingdom and Kesh. With them we can chart the movements
of all the bodies in the sky. We spoke of a sign.
You may now see it. Come.'
He led them all up a long flight of stairs that took them
to the top of the tower. They emerged upon the roof,
amid strange devices of confounding configuration.
Arutha looked about and said, 'it is well you understand
this, father, for I do not.'
'Like men,' said the Abbot, "the stars and planets have
both physical and spiritual properties. We' know other
worlds spin their orbits about other stars. We know this
for fact, since' - he pointed to Laurie - 'one who has
lived for a time on an alien world stands with us at this
moment.' When Laurie looked astonished, the Abbot
said, 'We are not so cut off from the rest of the world
that something as important as your adventures on Kelewan
would not be heard here, Laurie of Tyr-Sog.' Returning
to his original topic, he said, 'But that is the physical
side of the stars. They also reveal secrets to those who
watch by their arrangement, their pattern, and their
movement. Whatever the reason for this phenomenon,
this we know: at times a clear message comes to us from
the night sky, and we who are bent on gaining knowledge
will not refuse to heed such a message, we will remain
open to every source of knowledge, including those often
held in disrepute. 'The mysteries of these devices, as well as reading the
stars, are only a matter of taking the time to master the
subject. Any man of sufficient wit can learn. These
devices,' he said with a sweep of his hand, "are all quite
clear in use and purpose once they've been demonstrated.
Now, if you'll please look through this device here.
Arutha looked through a strange sphere, constructed
from a complex latticework of metals. "This is used to
chart the relative motion of stars and visible planets.'
"You mean there're invisible ones?' asked Jimmy without thinking.
'Correct,' said the Abbot, overlooking the interruption,

'Or at least there are those we can't see, though if we
were close enough they would be visible.'
"Part and parcel of the arts of divination is the science

of knowing when the auguries are in fruition, at best a
chancy business. There is a famous prophecy made by
the mad monk Ferdinand de la Rodez. By common
account, it has come to pass on three different occasions,
No one can agree which event was the one he predicted.'
Arutha studied the sky through the device, only half
listening to the Abbot. Through the eyehole he saw a sky
ablaze with stars, overlaid with a faint network of lines
and notations, which he assumed were somehow inscribed
on the inside of the sphere. In the centre was a configuration
of five stars, reddish in colour, one in the centre,
with lines connecting them in a bright red X. 'What am I . '
seeing?' he asked. He relinquished his place to Martin
and the former hunter looked through the device.
The Abbot said, "Those five stars are called the
Bloodstones. '
Martin said, "I know them, but I've never seen that
pattern before.'
"Nor shall you again for another eleven thousand years

- though that is a guess, and we shall have to wait until it
occurs again to be sure.' He seemed unperturbed by the
duration, in fact he seemed quite willing to wait. "What
you see is a pattern called the Fiery Cross or cross of
Fire. There is an ancient prophecy concerning it.'
"What is this prophecy, and what has it to do with me?'
asked Arutha.
"The prophecy comes from near the time of the Chaos
Wars. It says, '"When the Cross of Fire lights the night
and the Lord of the West dead is, shall then return
the Power." It's quite well constructed poetically in the
original, though it loses in translation. What we take it to
mean is that some agency seeks your death to cause this
prophecy's fulfilment, or at least seeks to convince others
the prophecy's near fruition. Another germane fact is
that the prophecy is one of the few things we have that
.were created by the Pantathian serpent people. We know
little about these creatures. We know that on those rare
'occasions when they appear they herald troubles, for they
are' clearly agents of evil working towards ends only they
understand. We also know that the prophecy says the
Lord of the West is also called Bane of Darkness.'
"So someone wants Arutha dead because he is fated to
beat them if he lives?' asked Martin.
. "Or so they believe,' answered the Abbot.
'But who or what?' said Arutha. "That someone wishes
me dead comes as no revelation. What more can you tell me?"
'Little, I'm afraid.'
Laurie said, 'Still, it gives some small reason behind
the Nighthawks' attacks upon you . '
'Religious fanatics,' said Jimmy, shaking his head, then

he looked at the Abbot. "Sorry, father.'
The Abbot ignored the remark. "What is important to
understand is that they will try again and again and again.
You will not be done with them until you root out the
ultimate author of the order to kill you.'
'Well,' said Martin, "we also know that the Brotherhood
of the Dark Path is involved.'
"North,' said Brother Micah. Arutha and the others
looked at him questioningly. 'Your answers lie northward,
Arutha. Look there,' he said, his voice still containing a
note of command. 'To the north lie the High Ranges, all
barriers against the denizens of the Northlands. In the
west above Elvandar perch the Great Northern Mountains,
in the east, the Northern Guardians, the High
Fastness, and the Dreaming Mountains. And across the
centre lies the greatest range of all, the Teeth of the
World, thirteen hundred miles of nearly impassable crags.
Who knows what lies beyond? What man, save renegade
or weapons runner, has ventured there and returned to
tell of the Northlands?
our ancestors created the Border Baronies ages ago,
to bottle up the passes at Highcastle, Northwarden, and
Ironpass. The Duke of Yabon's garrisons block the only
other major pass to the west of the Thunderhell Steppes
And no goblin or Dark Brother treads upon the Thunderhell
and lives, for the nomads do our guarding for us. In
short, we know nothing of the Northlands. But that is
where the moredhel live and that is where you'll find
your answers.' 'Or I'll find nothing,' said Arutha. 'You may be concerned
about prophecy and portents, but I care only for
finding the answer to the riddle of Silverthorn. Until
Anita is again safe, I shall put my efforts to nothing else.
The Abbot appeared disturbed by this. Arutha said, 'That
there is a prophecy I have no doubt, and that some
Madman with arcane powers is seeking my death is also
not in doubt. But that this spells some great danger to
the Kingdom is a long reach. Too long for me. I'll need
more proof. '
The Abbot was about to answer when Jimmy said
.What is that?'
All eyes turned to look where he pointed. Glowing low
on the horizon was a blue light, brightening as if a star
were growing before their eyes. Martin said, "It looks like
a falling star.'
Then they could see it was no star. A faint sound in the
distance accompanied the approaching object. Brighter it
grew, as the sound grew louder, more angry. Racing
across the sky towards them was a blue fire. Suddenly it
was speeding directly over the tower with a sizzling sound,
like a hot iron passing through water.
Then Brother Dominic shouted, 'Off the tower
quickly! '

11
Clash

They hesitated for a moment.
Dominic's warning was followed by a shout from
Micah, and the others hurried down the stairs. Halfway to
the ground floor, Dominic faltered, swaying a little on his
feet. "Something approaches.'
Reaching the main floor, Arutha and the others hurried
to the door and looked out. In the sky above, more of
the glowing objects streaked overhead with unbelievable
speed. First from one quarter of the sky, then another,
they sped, their strange, ominous droning filling the night.
Faster and faster they shot through the air, streaks of
blue, green, yellow, and red, angry flashes of brilliance
ripping through the dark.
'What are they?' shouted Jimmy.
'Magic sentinels of some kind,' answered the Abbot. "I

can sense they are searching the area they pass over.'
Slowly the pattern changed, instead of passing directly
overhead, they began to curve and fly off at a tangent to
their original course. Those below could see that the
objects were slowing in their flight. The curving course
tightened, until the glowing objects sped through the
night in great arcs overhead. Then they slowed even
more, gaining definition. They were large spheres, pulsing
with a bright inner light, and inside could be seen strange
dark shapes, somehow disturbing in appearance. They
continued to slow until they hovered and spiralled, forming
a circle above the abbey courtyard. Once the
circle was formed, twelve glowing spheres could be seen
hanging silently and motionless over the courtyard. Then,
with a deep snapping, buzzing sound painful to the ears.
lines of energy shot across the gap between each pair and
Six lines joined the spheres. Then a line formed around
the periphery so that now the spheres formed a
dodecagon. 'What are these things?' Gardan wondered aloud.

'The Twelve Eyes,' the Abbot said in awe, 'an ancient
and evil spell of legend. No one living is said to have the
power to form this thing. It is both a vehicle for seeing
and a weapon.' Then the spheres slowly began to move. Gaining speed,
they began weaving an intricate pattern, the lines twisting
maddeningly, beyond the ability of the eye to follow.
Faster they spun, until they became a blurring solid of
light. A shaft of energy shot down from the centre
striking some invisible barrier above the roofs of the
buildings.
Dominic screamed in pain and had to be caught by
Martin. The monk's hands pressed hard against his
temples and he said, 'So powerful. I can scarcely believe the
barriers are holding.' He opened eyes running with tears.'
Father John said, 'Brother Dominic's mind is the keystone
to the mystic defences of the abbey. He is being
sorely tested.'
Again angry energies shot downwards, to be scattered
across the invisible barrier, like a multicoloured shower
above their heads. Shards of mystic rainbow light streaked
down the sides of the magic barrier, 'defining the dome
above the abbey for the eye to see. But again the barrier
held. Then another, and another, and soon Arutha and
the others could see that the barrier was being pushed
lower each time. With each assault, Dominic would cry
out in pain. Then, with explosive fury, a single shaft of
blinding white light struck the barrier and broke through,
searing the ground with an angry hiss and acrid odour.
With the attack, Brother Dominic stiffened in Martin's
arms and groaned. 'it is entering,' he whispered before
he passed into unconsciousness.
As Martin lowered the monk to the floor, Father John
said, 'I must go to my vestry. Brother Micah, you must
hold it.'
Micah told them, 'Whatever is out there has breached
a mystic defence second only to that at our father'temple.
Now I must face it. I am armed and shielded by Ishap,'
the old monk said in ritual, as he unlimbered the war
hammer at his belt.
A roar of impossible volume, like a thousand lions
voicing rage at once, shook the abbey. It began as a
teeth-jarring shriek and ran down the scale until it seemed
to grind at the very stones of the building. Bolts of energy
lashed out, seemingly in random directions, and where
they struck, destruction ensued. Stones seemed to crumble
under the onslaught, whatever was flammable was set
afire, and any water touched by the bolts exploded into
clouds of steam. They watched as Micah left the building, striding out
to stand below the spinning disk. As if anticipating, he
raised his hammer above his head as another bolt of
energy lashed downwards, blinding those who watched
from the door. When the initial blaze of white died down,
they could see Micah standing upright, hammer held
overhead as the crackling energies cascaded around him,
scattering in broken spectrum, so that all the colours of
the rainbow danced within the inferno. The very ground
at his feet smoked and burned, but he was unharmed.
Then the flow of energy halted, and in an instant Micah
had pulled back his hammer and made his throw. Almost
too quick for the eye to follow, the hammer left his hand
and became a blur of blue-white energy as bright and
blinding as its target. Higher than was possible for a man
to throw, the bolt of flame sped, striking the blazing disk
dead centre. It seemed to bounce off the disk, and the
blue bolt returned to Micah's hand. The thing lashed out
at Micah again, but once more he was protected by the
hammer's mystic powers. Again he cast his hammer as
soon as the rain of light ceased, striking it at the heart.
As the hammer returned, those inside the abbey could
see that the thing was beginning to wobble slightly as it
spun. A third time he cast his hammer and it struck,
Suddenly there was a rending sound, a tearing so loud
that Arutha and the others were forced to cover their
ears. The circling spheres shattered, and from the centre
of each plunged small alien shapes. With a wet, plopping noise they
struck the ground, wiggled grotesquely, and
began to smoke. A high keening shriek filled the night as
they erupted into brilliant flame. No one could discern
the true forms of the creatures from the spheres, but
Arutha was filled with a sense it was something best left
undiscovered, for in the instant they ignited, the shapes
resembled nothing so much as horribly disfigured babies.
Then the night was silent, as a rain of sparkling colours,
like fine motes of glass star stuff, began to fall on the
abbey. One by one the motes flared and winked out,
until the old monk stood silently in the court, his war
hammer held before him.

Those who stood in the shelter of the abbey looked at
one another, astonishment on their faces. For a long
moment they said nothing, then they began to relax.
"That was . . . incredible,' said Laurie. "I don't know if I
could find the words to describe it.'
Arutha was about to speak, but something in the way
Jimmy and Martin both cocked their heads to one side
made him stop. Jimmy said, "I hear something.' They all
stood silent for a moment, then could hear a distant
sound, as if some great bird or bat flapped giant wings in
the night.
Jimmy ran from the building before anyone could stop
him, nearly spinning as he scanned every quarter of the
night sky. Looking back over the roof of the abbey,
towards the north, he saw something that made his eyes
widen. 'Banath!' he exclaimed and dashed to where the
old monk still stood, unmoving and silent. Micah seemed
in some sort of trance, eyes closed. Jimmy gripped his
arm and shook him. "Look!' he shouted as the monk
opened his eyes.
Micah looked to where the boy pointed. Blotting out
the large moon in the night sky was something that flew
towards the abbey, propelled on giant, powerful wings.
instantly the monk shoved the boy away. "Run.'
The push sent Jimmy away from the abbey, so he raced
across the courtyard to where a lone wagon sat, filled
with fodder for the stable horses, and dived under it. With
a roll and a turn, he lay still, watching.
A thing of despair fashioned in a shape of utter horror
descended from the sky. Wings a full fifty feet in width
flapped lazily as it dropped down to where the old monk
stood. It was a twenty-foot-tall composite of everything
loathsome to sane beings. Black talons extended from
grotesque parodies of bird claws, atop which rose legs
reminiscent of a goat's. But where haunches should have
been, only great wattles of fat, huge rings of blubber,
shook and quivered, hanging impossibly down from below
a manlike chest. Over the body a thick wet-looking
substance oozed downwards in rivulets. In the centre of
the thing's chest, a blue-coloured but otherwise normallooking
human face stared out in wide-eyed horror,
constantly twitching and screaming in gibbering counterpoint
to the thing's own loud bellows. Each arm was
powerfully fashioned, long and apelike. It shimmered in
the faint light, rapidly changing, first red, then orange,
then yellow, and onward through the spectrum until it was
again red. And from it emitted a mixture of foul odours.
as if the vile smell of every decaying and festering thing
in the world had been distilled down and infused into the
creature's being. Most horrid of all was the head, for in supreme cruelty,
whatever or whoever had fashioned the misshapen monster
had adorned it with a woman's head, large to fit the
body, but otherwise normal. And the ultimate jest was in
the features of that face, for, in precise imitation, the
thing bore the likeness of Princess Anita. Wild "tresses
seemed to blow in all directions, framing her features in a
cloud of red hair. But its expression was one of a street
whore, lewd and wanton, as the thing salaciously licked
its lips and rolled its eyes towards Arutha. Blood-red lips
split into a wide  grin, showing long fangs in place of
human eyeteeth.
Arutha looked on the thing with a disgust and loathing
that rose up to banish any thought save to destroy this
obscenity. 'No!' he shouted as he began to pull his sword.
Gardan was instantly upon him, driving him to the
floor of the building, bringing his strength to bear to hold
him down, yelling, 'That's what they want!'
Martin lent his strength to stop Arutha, and he and
Gardan pulled the Prince away from the door. The
creature turned to look at those within the door, absently
flexing its claws. Pouting like a little girl, it suddenly
leered at Arutha, then stuck out its tongue, wiggling it
suggestively. Then with a bellowing laugh, it rose up to
its full height and roared at the stars, arms stretched high
overhead. With a single step, it moved towards the
doorway where the Prince waited. Then suddenly it
rocked forwards, shrieked in pain, and turned around.
Arutha and his companions looked past it to see a
blue-white bolt of energy returning to Brother Micah's
hand. He had struck the first blow while the thing had
been distracted. Again he cast his hammer. In a blur it
flashed to strike the thing in its huge stomach, bringing
another bellow of pain and rage, as a trickle of steaming
black blood began to flow.
'"oh, my!' came a voice from behind Arutha.
Laurie saw that Brother Anthony had come up from
some deep vault beneath the abbey and was peering
intently at the creature. Laurie said, "What is that thing?'
Showing no emotion except curiosity, the archivist

said, 'I believe it to be a conjured creature, something
fashioned by magic means, brewed up in a vat. I can
show you some references in a dozen different works on
how to create them. Of course, it could be some rare
naturally occurring beast, but that seems highly
improbable. '
Martin rose, leaving Gardan to restrain Arutha. He
unlimbered his ever present bow, quickly strung it, and
fitted an arrow to his bowstring. The .  creature was advancing
upon Brother Micah when Martin let fly. The archer's
eyes widened as the arrow seemed to pass through the
creature's neck without effect.
Brother Anthony nodded. 'Yes, it is a conjuration.
Notice how it is impervious to mundane weapons.'
The creature swung one of its mighty fists down at
Brother Micah, but the old fighter simply raised his
hammer as if to block. The creature's blow halted a full
foot above the monk's upraised hammer, recoiling as if it
had hit stone. It bellowed in frustration.
Martin turned to Brother Anthony. "How do you kill
it?'
"I don't know. Each of Micah's blows draws energy
away from the spell used to create it. But it is a product
of tremendous magics, and it might last a day or longer.
Should Micah falter . . .'
But the old monk was firm on his feet, answering every
blow with a parry and wounding the creature, seemingly
at will. While it seemed pained by each wound the
hammer made, it gave no sign of being weakened.
'How do you make one?' Martin asked Brother
Anthony. Arutha was no longer struggling, but Gardan
still knelt with his hand upon his shoulder.
Anthony, caught up for a second in Martin's question,
said, 'How do you create one?
"Well, it's rather complicated."
The creature became increasingly enraged by Micah's
blows and hammered uselessly at the monk. Tiring of this
tactic, it dropped to its knees as it levelled a blow at
Micah, overhand as if driving a spike with a hammer, but
at the last instant it shifted its aim and slammed its
massive fist down on the ground next to the monk.
The jolt caused Micah to stumble slightly, which was
the only opening the creature needed. Instantly sweeping
its hand sideways, it knocked Micah across the courtyard.
The old monk hit the ground heavily, rolled awkwardly
and lay stunned, his hammer bouncing away from him.
Then the thing was again moving towards Arutha.
Gardan leapt to his feet, pulling his sword as he dashed
forwards to protect his Prince. The veteran captain stood
before the thing, which grinned hideously down at him,
.the terrible parody of Anita adding a sickening element
to the confrontation. Like a cat playing with a mouse, the
creature pawed at Gardan.
From out of an inner door, Father John reappeared,
holding a large metal staff topped with an odd-looking
seven-sided device. He stepped before Arutha, who was
trying to move to aid Gardan, and shouted, 'No. you can
do nothing.'
Something in his voice told Arutha it was futile to
attempt to engage the thing, and the Prince retreated a
step. The Abbot turned to confront the conjured creature.
Jimmy crawled out from under the wagon and came to
his feet. He knew the uselessness of drawing his dirk.
Seeing the supine figure of Brother Micah, he ran to see
how he fared. The old monk was still senseless, and
Jimmy pulled him back towards the relative safety of the
wagon. Gardan hacked uselessly at the creature while it
played with him.
Jimmy cast about and saw the mystic hammer of
Brother Micah lying off to one side. He dived for it and
grabbed the haft on the fly, coming to rest on his stomach,
eyes upon the monster. The thing had not noticed the
boy's recovery of the weapon. Jimmy felt surprise when
he lifted it, for it was twice the weight he expected. He
rose to his feet and ran to stand behind the monster,
confronted by its foul, fur-covered hindquarters, arching
above his head as it reached forward to grab Gardan.
The captain was seized in a mammoth hand that lifted
him towards the widening mouth. Father John raised up
his staff and suddenly waves of green and purple energy
flowed from it, washing over the creature. It howled in
pain and squeezed Gardan, who cried out in concert.
Martin shouted, 'Stop. It's crushing Gardan!'
The Abbot ceased his magic and the thing snorted as it
tossed Gardan at the door, seeking to injure its tormentors.
The captain slammed into Martin, Brother Anthony,
and the Abbot, knocking them to the ground. Arutha
and Laurie both sidestepped the flying bodies. The Prince
turned to see the leering parody of Anita's face bending
towards the door. The creature's wings prevented it from
entering the abbey, but long arms came snaking through
the door, reaching for Arutha. Martin rose, helping the shaken Abbot and
Brother Anthony to their feet. The archivist said, 'Yes! Of course
The face in its chest. kill it there!'
Martin had an arrow nocked in an instant, but the
crouching thing hid the target. It reached through the
door for Arutha, then suddenly it was sitting back on its haunches.
Martin pulled back as he said, "Kilian guide my arrow,
and let fly. True to the aim, the shaft flew and struck the
insane face in the chest square in the forehead. The eyes
in that face rolled up and closed as red, human blood
billowed from the wound. The creature stopped rockstill.
As all watched in wonder, the creature began to quiver.

It grew instantly more brilliant in colour as the lights
within flashed rapidly. Then all could see it was becoming
transparent, insubstantial, a thing of coloured glowing
smokes and gases,'swirling in a mad dance as they slowly
dissipated on the night wind. Their lights faded until once
again the courtyard was empty and silent.
Arutha and Laurie came up to Gardan, who was still
conscious. 'What happened?' the Captain asked feebly.
All eyes turned to Martin. He indicated Brother
Anthony, who responded, "It was something the Duke
asked, how one of those things is made. All the foul arts
to make such a being require some animal or human to
work upon. That face was all that was left of the poor
demented soul who had been used as a focus to create
the monster. It was the only mortal part, subject to
mundane injury, and when it was killed, the magic . . .
unravelled. '
Martin said, 'i'd not have made that shot had it not
reared back like that.'
'Most fortunate,' said the Abbot.
'Fortune had little to do with it,' said a grinning Jimmy.
He held Brother Micah's hammer as he approached. "I
stuck it up the arse.' He indicated the stunned Micah.
'He'll do all right,' he said as he gave the hammer to the
Abbot.
Arutha was still shaken by the sight of Anita's face
atop that horror. Laurie, with a weak smile, said, "Father,
if it wouldn't be too much trouble, have you some wine
we might drink? That was the worst smell I've ever
endured. '
"ha!' Jimmy said indignantly. 'You should have tried it
from my end!'

Arutha watched the dawn break over the Calastius Mountains,
the rising sun was an angry red orb. In the hours since
the attack the abbey had returned to a semblance of
order and quiet, but Arutha felt only turmoil within.
Whatever lay behind these attempts upon him was power-
far beyond anything he had anticipated, despite clear
warning from Father Nathan and the High Priestess of
lims-Kragma. He had grown incautious in his haste to
discover a cure for Anita, and such was not his nature.
he could be bold when needed, and boldness had won
him several victories, but of late he had not been bold,
but 'headstrong and impulsive. Arutha felt something
alien, something he had not felt since he was a boy.

Arutha felt doubt. He had been so confident in his
planning, but Murmandamus either had anticipated every
move or somehow could react with unbelievable speed
each time Arutha made a step.
Arutha came out of his musing to see Jimmy beside
him. The boy shook his head. 'Just shows you what I've
always said.'
Despite his concerns, Arutha 'found himself slightly
amused by the boy's tone. 'What is that?'
'No matter how canny you think you are, something
can come along, bar, and put you on your prat. Then
you think, "That's what I forgot to consider." Eagle-eye
hindsight, old Alvarny the Quick used to call it.'
Arutha wondered if the boy had been reading his
thoughts. Jimmy continued. "The Ishapians are sitting up
here, mumbling prayers to themselves, and convinced
they've got a real magic stronghold - "nothing can breach
our mystic defences,"' he mimicked. "Then along come
those balls of light and that flying thing and whoops. "We
didn't consider this or that!" they've been jabbering
about what they should have done for an hour. Well, I
guess they'll have something stronger around here soon.'
Jimmy leaned back against the stone wall facing the cliff,
Beyond the walls of the abbey the valley was emerging
from the shadows as the sun reached higher in the sky,
'Old Anthony was telling me that the spells necessary for
last night's show took some doing, so he doesn't think
anything magic will come this way for a while. They'll be
strong in their fortress . . . until something comes along
that can kick down the gates again, as it were.'
"Something of a philosopher, are you?' Arutha smiled
slightly as Jimmy shrugged. 'Scared to pissing in my trousers is what I am, and
you'd do well to be scared as well. Those undead things
in Krondor were bad enough, but last night, well, I don't
know how you feel about it, but if I were you, I'd
consider moving to Kesh and changing my name.'
Arutha smiled ruefully at that, for Jimmy had made
him see something he had denied. 'To be honest, I am
just as scared as you, Jimmy.'
Jimmy looked surprised at the admission. "Truth?'
'in truth. Look, only a madman would not be fearful
- of facing what we have, and what may come, but what
matters isn't whether or not you're frightened, but how
you behave. My father said once that a hero is someone
who simply got too frightened to use his good sense and
run away, then somehow lived through it all.'
Jimmy laughed, boyish glee making him seem as youthful
as his years rather than the man-boy he looked most
of the time. 'That's a truth, too. Me, I'd rather do what
needs be done, quickly, and get on to the fun. This
suffering for grand causes is the stuff of sagas and
legends.'
Arutha said, "See, there's a bit of the philosopher in
you, after all.' He changed topics. "You acted swiftly last
night, and bravely. Had you not distracted the monster
so Martin could slay it - '
'We'd be on our way back to Krondor with your bones,
assuming it didn't eat them,' finished Jimmy with a wry
grin.
'Don't look so pleased at the prospect.'
jimmy's grin broadened. "I'd not be, fact is. You're
one of the very few I've met worth having around. By
most standards this is a merry bunch, though the times
are grim. I'm sort of having fun, if the truth be known.'
'You have a strange sense of fun.'
Jimmy shook his head. 'Not really. If you're going to
be scared senseless, might as well enjoy it. That's what
thieving's about, you know. Breaking into someone's
home in the dead of night, not knowing if they're awake
and waiting with a sword or club to spread your brains
out on the floor when you stick your head in the window.
 Being chased through the streets by the city watch. It's
not fun, but it sort of is, you know? Anyway, it's exciting.
And besides, how many can boast they saved the Prince
of Krondor by goosing a demon?'
Arutha laughed hard at that. "Hang me, but that's the
first thing I've had to laugh aloud at since . . . since the
wedding.' He placed his hand upon Jimmy's shoulder.
"You earned some reward this day, Squire James. What
shall it be?'
Jimmy's face screwed up in a display of hard thinking.
'Why not name me Duke of Krondor?'
Arutha was thunderstruck. He started to speak, but
stopped. Martin approached from the infirmary and.
seeing such a strange expression on Arutha's face said,
"What ails you?'
Arutha pointed to Jimmy. 'He wants to be Duke of
Krondor.'
Martin laughed uproariously. When he quieted, Jimmy
said, 'Why not? Dulanic's here, so you know his retirement's
 not bogus. Volney doesn't want the post, so who
else are you going to give it to? I've a fair wit, and I've
done you a favour or two.'
Martin continued laughing while Arutha said, "For
which you have been paid.' The Prince was caught
between outrage and amusement. 'Look, you bandit, I
might think about having Lyam give you a minor barony
- very minor - to take charge of, when you reach your
majority, which is at least three years away. For now
you'll have to settle for being named Senior Squire of the
Court.'
Martin shook his head. 'He'll organize them into a
street gang.'
.Well,' said Jimmy, 'at least I'll have the pleasure of
seeing that ass Jerome's face when you give deLacy the
order.'
Martin stopped his laughing and said, 'I just thought
you'd like to know Gardan will be fine, as will Brother
Micah. Dominic is up and about already.'
"The Abbot and Brother Anthony?'
'The Abbot is off somewhere doing whatever abbots
do when their abbeys have been desecrated. And Brother
Anthony is back looking for Silverthorn. He said to tell
you he'll be in chamber sixty-seven if you wish to speak
with him. '
Arutha said, "I'm going to find him. I want to know
what he's discovered.' As he walked away, he said,
"Jimmy, why don't you explain to my brother why I should
elevate you to the second most important dukedom in
the Kingdom?'
Arutha walked off in search of the head archivist.
Martin turned to look at Jimmy, who grinned back at him.

Arutha entered the vast chamber, musty with age and the
faint odour of preservatives. By flickering lantern light
Brother Anthony was reading an old volume. Without
turning to see who entered, he said, "Just as I thought, I
knew it would be here.' He sat up. 'That creature was
similar to one reported killed when the Temple of TithOnanka
in Elarial was invaded three hundred years ago.
it Was certain, according to these sources, that Pantathian
serpent priests were behind the deed.'
Arutha said, 'What are these Pantathians, brother?
I've only heard the stories told to frighten children."
The old monk shrugged. 'We know little, in truth.
most of the intelligent races on Midkemia we can, in some
way,'understand. Even the moredhel, the Brotherhood of
the Dark Path, have some traits in common with
humanity. You know, they have a rather rigid code of
honour, though it is an odd sort by our standards.
these creatures . . .' He closed the book. "Where
Pantathia lies, no one knows. The  copies of the maps left
pug by Macros that Kulgan of Stardock sent us show no sign
of it. These priests have magics unlike any other. They
are the avowed enemies of humanity, though they have
dealt with some humans in the past. One thing else is
clear, they are beings of undiluted evil. For them to serve
this murmandamus would mark him a foe of all that is
good if nothing else did. And that they serve him also
marks him a power to fear.
Arutha said, 'Then we know little more than what we
knew by Laughing Jack's report."
'True,' said the monk, "but never discount the worth of
knowing he spoke the truth. Knowing what things are not
is often as important as knowing what they are.'
Arutha said, "in all the confusion, have you discovered
anything about Silverthorn?'
"As a matter of fact, I have. I was going to send word

as soon as I finished reading this passage. I have little
help to offer, I am afraid.' Upon hearing this, Arutha's
heart sank in his chest, but he indicated the old monk
should continue. 'The reason I could not quickly bring to
mind this Silverthorn is that the name given is a translation
of the name with which I am more familiar.' He
opened another book lying close by. "This is the journal
of Geoffrey, son of Caradoc, a monk at the Abbey of '
Silban west of Yabon - the same one your brother Martin
was reared at, though this was several hundred years ago,
Geoffrey was a botanist of sorts and spent his idle hour
in cataloguing what he could of the local flora. Here I've
found a clue. I'll read it. "The plant, which is called
Elleberry by the elves, is also known to the people of the
hills as Sparkle Thorn. It is supposed to have magic
properties when utilized correctly, though the proper
means of distillation of the essences of the plant is not
commonly known, being required of arcane ritual beyond
the abilities of common folk. It is rare in the extreme
having been seen by few living today. I have never beheld
the plant, but those .with whom I have spoken are most
reliable in their knowledge and certain of the plant's
existence."' He closed the book.
'is that all?' asked Arutha. 'I had hoped for a cure, or
at least some clue as to how one might be discovered.'
'But there is a clue,' said the old monk with a wink.
'Geofrey, who was more of a gossip than a botanist.
attributed the name Elleberry to the plant, as an elver
name. This is obviously a corruption of neleberB, an elver
word that translates to "'silverthorn Which means that
should any know its magic properties and how to over-
come them, it is the Spellweavers of Elvandar.'
Arutha was silent for a while, then said, 'Thank you,
Brother Anthony. I had prayed to end my search here,
but at least you've not dashed all hope.'
The old monk said, 'There is always hope, Arutha
ConDoin. I suspect that, in all the confusion, the Abbot
never got around to telling you the main reason for our
gathering all this.' His hand waved about him, indicating
the masses of books everywhere. "The reason we gather
all these works in this mount is hope. Of prophecy and
portents there are many, but one speaks of the end of all
we' know. It states that when all else has succumbed to
the forces of darkness, all that will be left will be "that
which was Sarth". Should that prophecy come true, we
wish to save the seeds of knowledge that can again serve
humanity. We work against that day, and pray it will never
come. Arutha said, 'You've been kind, Brother Anthony.'
"A man helps when he may.'
"thank you.'
Arutha left the chamber and climbed the stairs, his mmind playing over what
he knew. He considered options until he reached the courtyard.
Laurie had joined Jimmy and Martin, as had Dominic, who seemed
to have recovered from his ordeal, though he was still
pale. Laurie greeted the Prince and said, "Gardan should be
well enough tomorrow. '
'Good, for we leave Sarth at first light.'
"What do you propose?' said Martin.
'i'm going to put Gardan on the first ship bound from
Sarth for Krondor, and we'll continue on.'
.Continue on where?' asked Laurie.
'Elvandar.
Martin smiled. 'it will be good to visit there again.
Jimmy sighed. Arutha said, "What is it?'
"I was just thinking of your palace cooks and bony
horsebacks."
Arutha said, 'Well, don't think on them too long,
you're returning to Krondor with Gardan.'
'And miss all the fun?'
Laurie said to Martin, "This lad has a definitely warped

sense of fun.' Jimmy started to speak, but Dominic said, "Highness,

if I may travel with your captain, I wish to journey to
kRrondor. '
'Of course, but what of your duties?'
'Another will take my office. I will not be fit for that
sort of duty for some time, and we cannot wait. There is
no shame or dishonour, it is simply necessary.'
'Then I am sure Jimmy and Gardan will welcome your
company.
'Wait - ' began Jimmy
Ignoring the boy, Arutha asked the monk, "What sends
you to Krondor?'
'Simply that it lies on my route to Stardock. Father
John thinks it vital we should inform Pug and the other
magicians of what we know to be occurring. They practise
mighty arts unavailable to us.'
"That is well taken. We have need of all the allies we
can muster. I should have considered that myself. I will
give you some additional intelligence to take to them, if
you don't mind. And I'll have Gardan escort you down
to Stardock.'
'That would be kind.'
Jimmy had been trying to be heard as he protested
being sent back to Krondor. Ignoring his protests, Arutha
said to Laurie, 'Take our aspiring young duke here and
go down to town and find a ship. We'll follow tomorrow.
Also see about some fresher mounts, and don't get into
trouble.'
Arutha walked away towards the barracks with
Dominic and Martin, leaving Laurie and Jimmy in the
courtyard. Jimmy was still trying to make himself heard,
and was saying, " . but . . . '
Laurie clapped Jimmy on the shoulder and said, "Come
along, "Your Grace". Let's get down the road. If we can
finish our business early, we'll see if we can find a game
at the inn.'
An evil light seemed to come into Jimmy's eyes at that
"Game?' he said.

'You know, something like pashawa, or over-undermaninbetween.
Knucklebones or stones. Gambling.'
"oh,' said the boy. "You'll have to show me how.'
As he turned for the stable, Laurie fetched him a kick
in the rump, propelling him along. "Show you how,
indeed. I'm not some rube in from the farmlands here. I
heard that the first time I lost my poke.'
Running forward, Jimmy laughed. "it was worth a try."

Arutha entered the darkened room. Looking down at the
figure on the bed, he said, 'You sent for me?'
Micah raised himself up and leant back against the
pillows. 'Yes. I hear you're leaving this hour. Thank you for
coming.' He indicated Arutha should sit upon the bed. "I
need a little sleep, but I'll be fit enough in a week or so.
Arutha, your father and I were friends as youngsters.
Caldric was just establishing the practice of bringing
squires to court that's now taken for granted. We were
quite a bunch. Brucal of Yabon was our Senior Squire,
and he ran us ragged. In those days we were a fiery crew,
your father, myself, and Guy du Bas-Tyra.' At mention
of Guy's name, Arutha stiffened but said nothing. 'I like
to think we were the backbone of the Kingdom in our
day. Now you are. Borric did well with you and Lyam,
and Martin brings no shame. I am now serving Ishap, but
I still love this Kingdom, son. I just wanted you to know
my prayers are with you.'
Arutha said, "Thank you, my lord Dulanic.
He eased himself on his pillows. no longer. I'm just a
simple monk now. By the way, who rules in your place?'
"Lyam is in Krondor and will remain until I return.
Volney acts as Chancellor.'
At this Micah laughed, which brought a wince of pain.
'Volney. Ishap's teeth. he must hate it.'
"He does,' said Arutha with a smile.
'Are You going to have Lyam name him Duke?
'I don't know. As much as he protests, he's the most
able administrator available. We lost some good young
men during the Riftwar.' Arutha smiled his crooked
smile. "Jimmy suggests I name him Duke of Krondor.'
'Don't sell that one short, Arutha. Train him while you
have him. Pile the responsibility on him until he yells
and give him more. Educate him well, then take stock.
He's a rare one.' Arutha said, 'Why is this, Micah? Why this concern for

matters you've put behind?'
'Because I'm a vain old man and a sinner, despite my
repentance. I still admit to pride in how my city fared.
And because you're your father's son.'
Arutha was silent for a long time, then he said, 'You
and Father were close, weren't you?'
'Very. Only Guy was closer to Borric.'
'Guy?' arutha couldn't believe his father's most hated
enemy could have ever once been his friend. 'How is that
possible?'
Micah studied Arutha. "I thought your father would
have told you before he died.' He was silent for a long
moment. "Then again, Borric wouldn't.' He sighed. "We
who were friends to both your father and Guy, we all
took a vow. We vowed never to speak of the shame
which caused them to end the closest of friendships, and
which caused Guy to wear black every day for the rest of
his life, earning him the name Black Guy.'
Arutha said, father once mentioned that strange act
of personal courage, though he had no other good to
speak of Guy.'
"He wouldn't. And I will not either, for Guy would
have to release me from the vow, or be proved dead,
before I would speak. But I can say that before that
schism they were as brothers. Whether wenching, brawling,
or in war, neither was more than a voice's call from
the other's aid.
"But look you, Arutha. You have to rise early, and you
must get rested. You've no more time to idle away over
matters long buried. You must be off to find a cure for
Anita . . .' The old man's eyes misted over, and Arutha
realized that in his own dark concern for her he had
ignored the fact that Micah had always been a member of
Erland's household. He had known her since birth. She
would be like a granddaughter to him.
Micah swallowed hard. "These damn ribs! Breathe
deeply and your eyes water like you're eating raw onion.'
He let out a long sigh. 'I held her in my arms when the
priests of Sung the White blessed her, less than an hour
after her birth.' His eyes took on a far-off look. he turned
his face away and said, 'Save her, Arutha.
'I will find a cure.'
Whispering to control his emotions, Micah said, 'Then

go, Arutha. Ishap protect you.'
Arutha squeezed the old monk's hand for a moment,
rose, and left his quarters. Walking across the main hall
of the abbey building, he was intercepted by a silent
monk who indicated he should follow. He was led to the
Abbot's quarters and found the Abbot and Brother
Anthony waiting for him.
'it is good you took time to visit with Micah, Highness,'
said the Abbot. Suddenly Arutha became alarmed. "Micah will recover,

won't he?'
"if Ishap wills it. He is an old man to be withstanding
such an ordeal.' Brother Anthony seemed incensed by the notion and

almost snorted. The Abbot ignored the sound and said,
"We have given some thought to a problem that needs to be
dealt with."He pushed a small case towards Arutha, who
reached over and lifted it from the table.
The case was clearly ancient, of delicately carved wood,
and time had worn it almost smooth. When it was opened
it revealed a velvet cushion upon which rested a small
talisman. It was a bronze hammer, a miniature of that
which Micah had carried, a thong passing through a tiny
hole in the haft. 'What is it?'
Anthony said, (You must have considered how your
foe was able to locate you seemingly at will. It is likely
that some agency, perhaps the serpent priest, had located
you with a scrying spell of one sort or another. That
talisman is a legacy from our ancient past. It was
fashioned at the oldest known enclave of our faith, the
Ishapian abbey at Long, It is the most powerful artifact
we possess. It will mask your movements from all scrying
magic. To any who have been following you by arcane
means, you will simply vanish from sight. We have no
protection from mundane eyes, but if you are cautious
and mask your identity, you should be able to reach
Elvandar without being intercepted. But never remove it,
or you will again be subject to location by sorcery. It will
also render you impervious to the sort of attack we
endured last night. Such a creature would be unable to
harm you - though your enemy may still strike through
those about you, for they will not be so protected.'
Arutha placed the talisman around his neck and said,
'Thank you.'
The Abbot rose. "Ishap protect you, Highness, and
know you may always find haven here at Sarth.'
Arutha said thank you again and left the Abbot. As he
returned to his quarters and finished rolling his travel
bundle, he considered what he had learned. Pushing
doubt aside, he determined once again to save Anita.

12

Northward

A lone rider raced up the road.
' Arutha looked back as Martin warned of the approaching
horseman. Laurie turned his horse, drawing his sword,
Martin began to laugh. Arutha said, 'if that's who I
think, I'll have his ears.'
Martin said, 'Then sharpen your knife, brother, for
look at the way those elbows flap as he rides.'
Within moments Martin's prediction proved correct,
a grinning Jimmy reined in. Arutha took hno pains to
mask his displeasure. He said to laurie , "I tthought you
said he was safely upon the ship for Krondor with
cardan and Dominic.'
Laurie looked on with an expression of helplessness
"I thought he was, I swear.'
Jimmy looked at the three. 'isn't anyone going to say

hello?'
Martin tried to look serious, but even his elver-learned
composure was being tested. Jimmy had all the ingenuousness
of an eager puppy, as false a pose as most others
he assumed, and Arutha was trying hard to keep a stern
demeanour. Laurie hid his laughter behind a quickly
raised hand and a cough. Arutha shook his head, looking down at the ground.

Finally he said, 'All right, what is the tale?'
Jimmy said, "First of all, I swore an oath, it might not
mean much to you, but it is still an oath, and it binds us
"until the cat is skinned." And there was one other little
thing.'
Arutha said, 'What was it?'
'You were being watched while you left Sarth.'
Arutha sat back in the saddle, as startled by the boy's
offhand tone as much as by the revelation. "How can you
be certain?'
"In the first, the man was known to me. He's a certain
merchant from Questor's View, by name Havram, who is
in fact a smuggler employed by the Mockers. He's been
absent since the Nighthawks' infiltration was made known
to the Upright Man, and he was in the inn where Gardan.
Dominic, and I waited for the ship. I went aboard ship
with the good captain and the monk and slipped over the
side just before they weighed anchor. Then, in the second.
the man was without the normal retinue he employed
when working at his normal trade. He is usually a vocal.
affable man, given to public display when acting the
merchant, but in Sarth he lurked under a heavy cowl and
hugged dark corners. He would not be in such a place,
ignoring his usual role, unless forced to by unusual
circumstances. And he followed you from the inn, until
he was clear as to which way you had ridden. But most
important of all, he was an ofttime companion of both
Laughing Jack and Golden Base.'
Martin said, 'Havram! That was the man Laughing
Jack said recruited Golden and him to the Nighthawks.'
'They'll be relying on spies and agents now that they
can't use magic to find you,' added Laurie. 'it makes
sense they had someone in Sarth waiting for you to come
down from the Abbey.'
"Did he see you leave?' asked the Prince.
Jimmy laughed. "No, but I saw him leave.' They all
looked at him with questions on their faces, and the boy
said, 'I took care of him.'
'You did what?'
Jimmy looked pleased with himself; "Even a town as
small as Sarth has its underside if you know where to
look. Using my reputation as a Mocker of Krondor, I
made myself known and established my bona fides. Certain
people who wish to remain anonymous were made to
understand I knew who they were - and would be willing
to neglect mentioning it to the local garrison in exchange
for a service. As they thought I still enjoyed a favoured
position in the Mockers, they chose not to deposit me in
the bay, especially when I sweetened the deal with a
small pouch of gold I carried. I then mentioned there was
not a single person in the Western Realm who would
miss a certain merchant taking his ease at the inn. They
took my meaning. The false merchant is most likely on
his way to Kesh via the Durbin slave route even as we
speak, learning the finer points of menial labour."
Laurie slowly shook his head. "The boy has a definite  hard edge to him.'
Arutha heaved a resigned sigh. "It seems I am again in
your debt, Jimmy.'
'Jimmy said, "There's a small caravan coming up the
road about an hour behind. If we ride slowly they may
OVertake us by nightfall. We could most likely hire on as
additional guards and ride in with
other mercenaries when Murmandamus is out looking for
the three riders who left Sarth.'
Arutha laughed. "What am I to do with you?' Before
Jimmy could answer, he said, "And don't say anything
about being Duke of Krondor.' As he turned his mount
he said, 'And don't tell me where you got that horse.'

Fate, or the efficacy of the Ishapian talisman, served
Arutha and his three companions, for they encountered
no trouble along the road to Ylith. Jimmy's prediction of
a caravan's overtaking them proved accurate. It was a
poor thing, consisting of five wagons served by only two
bravos hired as guards. Once the merchant in charge was
satisfied they were not brigands, he welcomed them as
travelling companions - for he gained four additional
bodyguards for the price of a few meals.
For two weeks they travelled with little to disrupt the
monotony of the journey. Peddlers, traders, and caravans
of all sizes, with up to a score of mercenary guards,
passed both ways along the coast between Questor's View
and Sarth. Arutha was satisfied that should some spy or
agent discover him among the throng of bravos riding
along the road, it would be by pure chance.
Finally, near sundown, they could see the lights of
Ylith in the distance. Arutha rode point with Yanov the
merchant's two guards. He held back until the lead wagon
was even with him and said, "Ylith ahead, Yanov.'
The lead wagon passed, and the stout merchant, a silk
and fine-cloth peddler from Krondor, waved happily.
Arutha had been relieved to discover Yanov an ebullient
man, for he paid little attention to what others had to say
and Arutha's quickly contrived history had stood up to
scrutiny. As far as the Prince could tell, Yanov had never
seen him before.
Martin was the first to overtake Arutha, as  the last
Waggon in the train moved passed him.
"Ylith," said Arutha, kicking his mount into motion.
Jimmy and Laurie crossed the road from where they
had ridden flank as Martin said, 'Soon we'll be rid of this
train and can see to new mounts. These need a rest.'
Laurie said, 'i'll be pleased to be rid of Yanov. He
cacHes like a fishwife, without a halt.'
Jimmy shook his head in mock sympathy. "And he
hardly ever lets anyone else tell a story around the
campfire. Laurie glared. Arutha said, 'Enough. We'll be another
.band of travellers. If Baron Talanque discovers I'm here,
It'll turn into a state affair. We'll have feasting, tourneys, hunting,
expeditions, and everyone between the Great  Northern
mountains and Kesh will know I'm in Ylith. Talanque's a
good fellow, but he does enjoy his revels.'
jihmmy laughed. "He's not the only one.' With a whoop
and a shout, he spurred his horse forward. Arutha,
Laurie, and Martin sat amazed for a moment, then the
relief of reaching Ylith struck and they were off after the
    boy.
as Arutha raced past the lead wagon, he shouted,
.Good trading, Master Yanov!' The merchant looked
at them as if they'd become bereft of reason. Etiquette
required he Pay them a token for their stint at guard.
reaching the gates of the city, they slowed, as a
caravann of some size had just finished passing into Ylith
several other travellers were waiting for it to clear
the portals  before they could enter. Jimmy reined in
behind a farmers hey cart and spun his horse to face his
companions as they rode up, laughing at the momentary
frolick. Without words they fell into line, watching as
soldiers passed the cart through. In these peaceful days,
the soldiers seemed to be giving only the most cursory
inspection to those passing into the city.
Jimmy looked about, for Ylith was the first large city
he'd encountered since they'd left Krondor, and the busy
metropolitan rhythm was already making him feel at
home. Then near the gates he noticed a lone figure
hunkered down, watching those who passed through.
From his tartan plaid and leather breeches, it was clear
he was a Hadati hillman. His hair fell past his shoulders,
but a warrior's topknot was bound high, and he wore a
rolled scarf tied above his eyes. Across his knees rested a
pair of wooden sheaths, protecting the sharp edges of the
long, slender sword and a shorter half-sword common to
his people. Most striking about the man was his face, for
around the eyes, from forehead down to cheekbones, his
face was painted bone-white, as was his chin directly
below his mouth. He clearly studied the Prince as he
passed, then slowly rose as Jimmy and Martin followed
Arutha and Laurie into the city. Jimmy suddenly laughed aloud, as if
Martin had joked, and stretched, affording himself a quick glance behind.
The hillman was slowly walking through the gates behind
them, putting his sword and half-sword in his belt-sash.
Martin said, 'The Hadati?' WHen Jimmy nodded, the
Duke said, "You've a quick eye. Is he following?'
hHe is. Shall we lose him?'
Martin shook his head. 'We'll deal with him once we
settle somewhere. If we need to.'

As they rode up the narrow streets of the city, they
were greeted by signs of prosperity on all sides, for shops
burned brightly with lantern light as merchants showed
their wares to those out shopping in the cool of the
evening. even at this early hour of the evening, revellers were

about in numbers, as guards from caravans and sailors in
from months at sea were out in force, seeking whatever
pleasures gold could buy. A band of rowdy fighting men,
mercenaries by their look, pushed across the street,
obviously working on a heroic drunk, yelling and laughing.
One bumped against Laurie's horse and, in a display
of mock anger, shouted, "Here now. Watch where you're
pointing that beastie. Shall I teach you manners?' He faigned pulling his
sword, to the delight of those with

him. Laurie laughed along with the man as Martin,
Arutha, and Jimmy kept an eye on potential trouble.
'Sorry, friend,' said the singer. The man made a halfgrimace,
half-laugh as he again motioned as if to draw his
sword.
Another from the mercenary band pushed him roughly
asside and said, 'Go have a drink,' to his companion.
Smiling up at Laurie, he said, 'Still can't ride any better
than you can sing, Laurie?'
Laurie was off his mount instantly and embraced the
man in a bear hug. "Roald, you son of a whoremonger!'
They exchanged backslaps and hugs, then Laurie presented
the man to the others. 'This black heart is Roald,
a friend since boyhood and more than once a companion
on the road. His father owned the farm next to my
father's. '
the man laughed. 'And our fathers threw the both of
us out of home on almost the same day. '
Laurie introduced Martin and Jimmy, but when he reached
Arutha used the agreed-upon name of Arthur.
'Pleased to know your friends, Laurie,' said the
mercenary.
Laurie cast a quick glance about. 'We're blocking the
road. Let's find lodgings.'
'i'm staying at the inn next street over. It's almost civilized.'
He waved a hand for them to follow.

Jimmy spurred his horse forward and kept an eye on
the friend of the singer, studying the man with
a professional eye. He had all the earmarks of a seasoned
mercenary, one who had been earning a living with his
sword enough to be considered an expert by dint of
his still being alive. Jimmy glimpsed Martin looking rearward and
wondered if the Hadati still stalked them.

The inn was called the Northerner, respectable enough
for a place so near the docks. A stableboy roused himself
from a sorry-looking meal to take their horses. Roald
said, 'Keep them well, lad.' The boy obviously knew him.
Martin tossed the boy a silver coin.
Jimmy watched the boy catch the coin in midair, and
as he gave over his horse's reins, he placed the thumb of
his right hand between fore- and middle fingers, so the
boy could see. A flash of recognition passed between
them and the boy gave Jimmy a curt nod.
When they were inside, Roald signalled for the serving
girl to bring ale as he pointed to a table in the corner,
near the door to the stable yard and away from the
normal Row of customers. Pulling out a chair for himself,
Roald discarded his heavy leather gauntlets as he sat. He
spoke just loud enough for those at the table to hear,
'Laurie, last time I saw you was what? Six years ago?'
You went riding off with a LaMutian patrol to look for
Tsurani to write songs about. Now here you are with' he
indicated Jimmy - 'this short thief here.'
Jimmy grimaced. 'Highsign?'
'Highsign,' agreed Roald. When the others looked
confused, Roald said, 'This lad Jimmy gave the stableboy
a sign so the local thieves will keep hands off his kick,
Tells them a thief from another city is in town and
respecting the conventions and should have the courtesy
returned. Right?' Jimmy nodded appreciatively. 'Right. It tells them I

won't . . . work without their leave. Keeps things civilized.
The boy will pass the word.'
Quietly Arutha said, How did you know?'
'i'm no outlaw, but I'm no saint either. Over the years
I've kept all manner of company. Mostly I'm a simple
fighting man. Up to a year ago I was a mercenary in the
Yabonese Free Levies. Fought for King and country for a
silver piece a day and all "that.' His eyes got a distant
 look. "We'd been on and off the line for seven years. Of
the lads who signed aboard with our captain that first
year, one in five was left. Each winter we'd stay in LaMut
and our captain would go out recruiting. Each spring
we'd return to the front with fewer men.' His eyes
wavered to the ale before him. 'i've fought against bandits
and outlaws, renegades of all stripe. I served marine duty
on  a warship hunting pirates. I stood at Cutter's Gap
where fewer than thirty of us held back two hundred
goblins for three days until Brian, Lord Highcastle, could
come and fetch us out. But I never thought I'd live to see
the day the bloody Tsurani would quit. No,' he said, 'it's
glad I am to be standing guard on piddly little caravans
the hungriest outlaw in the land wouldn't bother with.
My biggest problem these days is keeping awake.' The
mercenary smiled. 'Of all my old friends, you were the
best, Laurie. I'd trust you with my life, if not my women
or money. Let's hoist a round for old times' sake, then
we can  start telling lies.'
arutha liked the openness of the fighter. The serving
girl brought another round, and Roald paid, over
Laurie's protest. "I'm in this very day with a great creaking
caravan from the Free Cities. My mouth is caked with a month'S
worth of road dust, and I'll only waste my gold
sooner or later. It might as well be now.'
Martin laughed and said, 'Only the first, friend Roald.
The rest are our pleasure.'
Jimmy said, "Have you seen a Hadati hillman around?'
Roled waved his hand. "They're around. Anyone in
particular?"
Martin said, "Green and black tartin on his plaid, white
paint on his face."
Roled said, "Green and black's a far northwest clan,
couldn't say which. But the white paint . . .' He and
Laurie exchanged glances.
Martin said, "What?'
Laurie said, "He's on a Bloodquest.'
Roald said, 'A personal mission. Some matter of clan
honour or another. And let me tell you, honour's no joke
to a Hadati. They're as intractable about it as those
damn Tsurani up in LaMut. Maybe he has to avenge a
wrongdoing, or pay back a debt for his tribe, but whatever
it is, only a fool would get in the way of a Hadati on
Bloodquest. They tend to be a forward lot with a sword.'
Roald finished his drink and Arutha said, 'if you will
join us, let's share a meal.'
The fighter smiled at that. "In truth, I am hungry.
The call was given and soon the food was served, and
conversation turned to an exchange of histories between
Laurie and Roald. Roald had listened raptly while Laurie
recounted his adventures during the Riftwar, though he
left out his involvement with the royal family and the
news he was to wed the King's sister. The mercenary's
mouth hung open. 'i've never known a singer not given
to overboasting, and you're the worst I've known, LaUrie,
but that tale is so outlandish I believe what you've said,
It's incredible.' Laurie looked stung. 'Overboast? Me?'

While they ate, the innkeeper came over and said to
Laurie, 'I see you to be a singer.' Laurie had brought
along his lute, a nearly instinctive habit. 'Will you honour
this house with your songs?'
Arutha looked ready to object, but Laurie said, 'Of

course.' To Arutha he said, 'We can leave later, Arthur,
In Yabon, even when a singer pays for his meals, it is
expected he will sing when asked. I build accounts. If I
pass this way, I can sing and eat even if I have no money."
He crossed to a dais in the corner near the front door to
the inn and sat upon a stool. He tuned his lute until the
pitch of each string was correct, then began his song. It
was a common tune, sung in all parts of the Kingdom and
known by all who sang in alehouses and inns. It was a
favourite of those who listened. The melody was pleasant,
but the words were mawkish.
Arutha shook his head. 'That's awful.'
.The others laughed. "True,' said Roald, 'but they like
it,' indicating the crowd.
Jimmy said, "Laurie plays what is popular, not always
what is good. That way he eats.'
Laurie finished to a loud round of applause and began
another song. It was a bright, ribald charity, sung by
sailors throughout the Bitter Sea, telling of a drunken
seaman's encounter with a mermaid. A group of sailors
just off a ship set up a clapping accompaniment to the
song, and one took out a simple wooden pipe and played
a clever countermelody. As the rowdy mood of the room
increased, Laurie slipped into another bawdy charity
regarding what occupies the captain's wife while her
husband is out to sea. The sailors cheered at this, and the
ONe with the pipe danced before the bar while he played.
As the festive feeling in the room increased, the front
'door opened and three men entered. Jimmy watched
them as they slowly made their way through the room
and said, 'Uh oh, trouble.'
Martin looked to where Jimmy was watching. "You
know them?'
" "no, but I recognize the type. It's the big one in front that'll' start
it.'

the;~~ man in question was the obvious leader of the
group. He was a tall, "red-bearded fighter, a barrel-chested
mercenary who had let most of his powerful frame run to
fat. He wore two dirks but was otherwise unarmed. His
leather jerkin barely closed over his gut. The two behind
him'.looked like fighting men. One was armed with a
variety of knives, varying from a tiny stiletto to a long
dagger. The other wore a long hunting knife at his belt.
The red-bearded man led his companions towards
Arutha's table, speaking rudely as he pushed all aside
who blocked his way. His manner wasn't entirely
unfriendly, for he exchanged loud, coarse jokes with
several men in the inn who obviously knew him. Soon all
three stood before Arutha's table. Looking at the four
seated there, the red-bearded man let a grin spread slowly
across his face. 'You sit at my table.' His accent betrayed
him as being from one of the southern Free Cities.
He leant forward, fists on the table between the plates
of food, and said, "You are strangers. I forgive you.'
Jimmy's mouth dropped open and he instinctively pulled
away, for the man's breath betrayed a day already spent
drinking and teeth long gone to rot. 'if you were Ylithmen,
you'd know when Longly is in town, every night he
sits at this table in the Northerner. Leave now, and I
won't kill you dead.' With that' he threw back his head
and laughed. Jimmy was the first on his feet, saying, 'We didn't

know, sir.' He smiled weakly as the others exchanged
glances. Arutha indicated he wished to quit the table and
avoid trouble. Jimmy made a show of being scared to
death of the fat fighter. 'We'll find another table.'
The man called Longly grabbed Jimmy's left arm above
the elbow. "This is pretty boy, no?' He laughed and
looked at his companions. 'Or maybe it's girl, dressed
like boy, he's so pretty.' He laughed again, then looked
at Roald. "This boy your friend? Or is he pet?'
Arutha reached across the table and put his hand upon
the man's arm. LLet the boy go.'
Jimmy's eyes rolled heavenwards as he said, "I wish
you hadn't said that.' Longly swung a backhanded blow at Arutha with his

hand, knocking the Prince backwards.
Roald and Martin exchanged resigned looks as Jimmy
quickly raised his right leg so he could reach the dirk in
his right boot top. Before anyone could move, Jimmy
had the point of the dirk placed firmly in Longly's ribs. "I
think you'd better find another table, friend.'
The huge man looked down at the thief, who barely
reached his chin, then at the dagger. With a roaring
laugh, he said, "Little fellow, you are very funny.' His free
hand shot out and gripped Jimmy's wrist with unexpected
speed. With slight effort, he forced the dirk away.
Jimmy's face became beaded with sweat as he struggled
to escape the vicelike grip of the red-bearded man. In the
corner Laurie sang on, ignorant of what was occurring at
his friends' table. Others nearby, used to the activities of
a seaport inn, were making room for impending trouble.
Arutha sat on the floor, still groggy from the blow, then
reached down and loosened his rapier in his scabbard.
Roald nodded to Martin and both slowly stood, making
a show of not pulling weapons. Roald said, 'Look, friend,
we mean no harm. Had we known this to be your usual
table, we'd have stayed clear. We'll find another. Let the
boy go.
The man threw back his head and laughed. gila! I
think I keep him. I know fat Quegan trader give me a
hundred gold for a boy so pretty.' With a sudden scowl
he looked about the table, then his gaze locked on Roald.
"you go. The boy will say he's sorry for poking Longly in
ribs, then maybe I let him go. Or maybe to fat Quegan
he goes. '
Arutha slowly rose. It was difficult to know if Longly
was seriously intending trouble, but after being struck,
Arutha was not about to give the man the benefit of the
doubt. The locals obviously knew Longly, and if he was
intending some simple brawling and Arutha was first
to pull steel, he could bring down their wrath. The fat
man's two companions looked on cautiously.
Roald exchanged another glance with Martin and raised
his flagon as if to finish his ale. With a sudden jerk he
tossed the contents of the mug into Longly's face, then
backhanded the knife bearer in the side of the head
with the pewter ale jack. The slender man's eyes rolled
upwards as he slumped to the floor. The third man was
distracted by Roald's sudden move and didn't see Martin's
fist as the Duke unloaded a thundering blow, knocking
longly's companion backwards over another table. With
the sudden action, more prudent customers began a quick
exit from the inn. Laurie stopped playing and stood up
on the dais to see what the problem was.
One of the barmen, not interested in who was responsible
for trouble, sprang over the bar and landed atop the
nearest combatant, who happened to be Martin. Longly
held fast to Jimmy's wrist, wiping ale from his own face.
Laurie carefully put down his lute and with a running
jump leapt from the dais to a tabletop and vaulted onto
Longly's back. Wrapping his arms around the large man's
throat, he began choking him. Longly rocked forward under the impact,
then regained his balance while Laurie clung to him. Ignoring the singer,
he looked at Roald, who was ready to fight. 'You should
not have thrown ale on Longly. Now I'm mad.'
Jimmy's face was turning white from the pain of the
large man's grip. Laurie said, "Somebody help me. This
giant's got a tree trunk for a neck!'
Arutha sprang to his right just as Roald struck Longly
in the face. The large man blinked, then, with an insolent
toss, threw Jimmy into Roald, knocking the mercenary
into Arutha. All three went down in a heap. With his
other hand he reached back over his shoulder and grabbed
Laurie by the tunic. He flipped the singer overhead,
tumbling him over the table. The table leg nearest Jimmy
collapsed and Laurie rolled off into Roald and Arutha as
they struggled to rise.
Martin had been grappling with the barman and
finished off the encounter by tossing him back over the
bar. He then reached out and seized Longly by the
shoulder, turning him. The red-bearded man's eyes
seemed to light at finding an opponent worthy of his
mettle. At four inches over six feet, Martin was taller,
though giving up pounds to Longly in bulk. Longly's
voice sounded in a gleeful shout as he reached out and
grabbed at Martin. Instantly they were in a wrestlers'
hold, each with his hand around the back of the other's
neck, opposite hand holding the other's wrist. For a long
moment they swayed, then moved slightly as each sought
a better advantage for a throw.
Laurie sat up, shaking his head. 'it's not human.'
Suddenly he realized he was sitting on Roald and Arutha
and began disentangling himself.
Jimmy got to his feet, wobbling as he stood. Laurie
looked up at the boy as Arutha stood up. 'What were
you trying to accomplish by pulling that dirk?' Laurie
asked the thief. 'Get us killed?'
Jimmy looked angrily to where the two big men
struggled for advantage. "Nobody talks about me that
way. I'm no fop's delight.'
Laurie said, 'Don't take things so personally.' He
Started to rise. 'He just wants to play.' Laurie's knees
buckled and he had to grab Jimmy to keep his feet. 'I
think. '

Longly was giving out a strange assortment of grunts as
he strove against Martin, while the Duke remained silent.
martin leaned forward, countering Longly's larger bulk
with greater height. What had started as a possible
bloodletting had settled into a passably friendly wrestling
contest, albeit a rough one. Longly suddenly pulled back,
but Martin simply followed the move, releasing his hold
on Longly's neck but holding on to his wrist. In a single
move he was behind the heavy man, holding Longly's
arm in a painful position behind his head The fat man
grimaced as Martin put pressure on the hold, slowly

forcing him to his knees.
Laurie helped Roled to his feet as the mercenary shook
his head, trying to gather his wits. When his vision had
cleared, he studied the contest. He said to Laurie, 'That
can't be very comfortable.'
Jimmy said, 'I expect that's why his face is turning
purple."
Roled started to sPeak to Jimmy, but something caused
his head to turn suddenly towards Arutha. Jimmy and
Laurie followed his gaze and their eyes widened.
Arutha, seeing all three staring at him, spun. A blackcloaked
figure had managed to approach the table silently
while the brawl was in progress. He stood stiffly behind
Arutha, a dagger in his right hand poised to strike. The
man's eyes stared forwards and his mouth moved silently.
Arutha's hand shot out, knocking aside the dagger, but
his eyes studied the figure behind the black-clad man.
The Hadati warrior Jimmy and Martin had seen at the
gate was poised, sword ready for another blow. He had
struck silently at the assassin from behind, preventing a
successful attack on the Prince. As the dying man collapsed,
the Hadati quickly put up his slender sword and
said, 'Come, there are others.'
Jimmy quickly examined the dead man and held up an
ebony hawk on a chain. Arutha turned to Martin and
said, "Martin, nighthawks! Finish it!'
Martin nodded to his brother, then, with a wrenching

movement that almost dislocated Longly's shoulder,
drove him to his knees. Longly looked upwards at Martin,
then closed his eyes in resignation as the Duke raised his
right hand. Halting his strike, Martin said, 'What use?'
and shoved Longly forward. The large man fell face downwards on the floor
and
then sat up, rubbing at his painful shoulder.
"Huh!" he laughed loudly. 'You come back sometime, big hunter
You give Longly good thrashing, by gods!'
They raced out of the inn to the stables. The stableboy
nearly fainted at the sight of all these armed men running
towards him. Arutha said, 'Where are our horses?' The
boy pointed towards the rear of the stable.
Martin said, "They'll not stand up to a long run tonight.'
Seeing other mounts, fresh and fed, Arutha said, 'Who
owns these?'
The boy said, (My master, sir. But they are to be sold
at auction next week.'
Arutha signalled for the others to saddle the fresh
mounts. The boy's eyes teared as he said, "Please, sir,
don't kill me.'
Arutha said, 'We'll not kill you, boy.'
The boy cowered away while the animals were saddled.
The Hadati took a saddle from what was obviously the
inn's supply of tack and made a sixth horse ready. Arutha
mounted and tossed a pouch at the boy. "Here, tell your
master to , sell our mounts and make up the difference
from what's in the bag. Keep something for yourself.'
When all were ready, they rode from the stable,
through the gates of the inn courtyard, and down a
narrow street. If an alarm was going out, the city gates
would soon be closed. A death in a bar brawl was a
chancy thing. They could be pursued or not, depending
upon which officer of the city watch was on duty that
night, as much as for any other cause. Arutha decided to
take no chances and they raced for the city's western
gate.
' The city guards barely took notice when the six horsemen
galloped past and disappeared down the highway
towards the Free Cities. No alarm had been sounded.
Down the road they flew, until the lights of Ylith were
a distant glow in the night behind them. Then Arutha
gave the signal to rein in.
He turned to the Hadati. 'We must speak.'
They dismounted and Martin led them to a small glade
some distance from the road. As Jimmy tethered the
horses, Arutha said "Who are you?"
"I am Baru, called the serpent-slayer," answered
the hillman.
Laurie said, 'That is a name of power.' He exPlained
to Arutha, "to earn his name, Baru killed a wyvern.'
Arutha looked at Martin, who inclined his head in
respect. 'To hunt dragonkind takes courage, strength of
arm, and luck.' Wyverns were first cousins to dragons
The difference was mainly of size. To face one was to
face rage and talons, speed and fangs, twelve feet high at
the shoulder.
the haddati smiled for the first time. 'You are a hunter
as your bow proclaims, Duke Martin.' At this Roald's
eyes widened. "Mostly, it takes luck."
Roled stared at Martin. "Duke Martin." He then
looked at Arutha. "Then you'd be . . ."
 The Hadati said, 'He is Prince Arutha, son of Lord
Borric and brother to our king. Did you not know?'
Roald sat back silently shaking his head in an emphatic no.
no. He looked at Laurie. this is the first time you've
ever told only part of a story.'
Laurie said, 'it's a long one and even stranger than the
other.' He said to Baru, "I see you are a northerner, but I
do not know your clan.'
The Hadati fingered his plaid. 'This signifies I am of
Ordwinson's family of the Iron Hills Clan. My people
live near the place you city men call Lake of the Sky.'
"you Bloodquest?'
He indicated the rolled scarf about his forehead. 'I
quest. I am Wayfinder.'
"ah, Highness.' Roald said, 'He's a sort of holy man."
Laurie said, 'A consecrated warrior. The scarf contains
the names of all his ancestors. They can have no rest
until he finishes his mission. He's taken a vow to complete
the Bloodquest or die.'
'How do you know me?' asked Arutha.
'I saw you on your way to the peace conference with
the Tsurani at the end of the war. There is little about
those days any of my clan will forget.' He looked into the
fire. 'When our King called to us, we came to fight the
Tsurani, and for nine years and more we did so. They
were strong foemen, willing to die for honour, men who
understood their place on the Wheel. It was a worthy
struggle.
"Then, in the spring of the last year of the war, the
Tsurani came in great number. For three days and nights
we fought, surrendering ground at great cost to the
Tsurani. On the third day we who came from the Iron
Hills were surrounded. Every fighting man of the Iron
Hills Clan was numbered among those who stood at bay.
To a man we should have died, save that Lord Borric saw
us imperilled. Had not your father sortied to save us, our
names would be but whispers upon yesterday's wind.'
Arutha recalled that Lyam's letter about his father's
death had mentioned Hadati. "What has my father's death
to do with me?'
Baru shrugged. 'I don't know. I was seeking knowledge
at the gate. Many pass there, and I was asking questions
to aid my quest. Then I saw you pass. I thought it would
be interesting to discover why the Prince of Krondor
would enter one of his own cities as a common fighter. It
would help pass the time while I sought information.
Then the assassin came, and I couldn't stand idly by and
watch him slaughter you. Your father saved the manhood
of my people. I saved your life. Perhaps that pays a debt
in part. Who can know how the Wheel turns?'
Arutha said, 'At the inn you said there were others?'
'The man who tried to kill you followed you into the
inn, watched you for a moment, then returned outside.
There he spoke to a street boy, giving him money, and
the boy ran off. He saw the three who fought with you
and stopped them before they could pass. I heard nothing
that was said, but he pointed to the inn and the three
entered.'
Arutha said, 'Then the fight was staged.'
Jimmy, who had finished with the horses, said, 'More
likely he knew longly's temper and made sure he knew
some strangers were at his usual table, in case they were
heading somewhere else and might miss us.'
Laurie said, "He might have wanted to keep us busy
until others arrived, then saw what he thought was too
good a chance to miss."
Arutha said, "Had you not been there, Baru, it would
have been too good a chance to miss.'
The Hadati took this as thanks and said, "There is no
debt. As I said, it may be I who am paying off a debt.'
Roald said, 'Well then, I guess you've sorted everything
out. I'll be off for Ylith.'
Arutha exchanged glances with Laurie. The minstrel
said, 'Roald, old friend, I think you should change your
plans.
"What?"
"Well, should you have been noticed with the prince
which seems likely , as there were thirty or forty people in
the inn when the brawl broke out, those who are looking
for him may decide to ask you where we're bound.'
With false bravado Roald said, 'Just let them try.'
Martin said, 'We'd rather not. They can be determined.
I've had dealings with moredhel before, and they lack
Rold's eyes widened. "the Brotherhood of the Dark path?"
Martin nodded and Laurie said, 'Besides, you're presently at liberty.'
"Which is how I plan to stay.'
Arutha tried a sterner stand. "You'd say no to your
Prince?'
"No disrespect Intended, Highness, but I'm a free man
not in your service and I've broken no laws. You have no
authority over me.'
'Look,' said Laurie, "there's a likelihood these assassins
are going to look hard for anyone seen with us. And even
though you're as tough a boot as I've known, I've seen
what they can do and I'd not risk being taken alone by
them.' Roald's resolve seemed unshaken.
Martin said, 'We could certainly find some reward for
service.'
Roald, visibly brightening, said, "How much?'
Arutha replied, 'Stay until we complete' our quest and
I'll pay you . . . a hundred golden sovereigns.'
Without hesitation Roald said, 'Done!' it was easily
four months' wages for even a seasoned caravan guard.
Arutha then looked at Baru. 'You spoke of needing
information. Can we aid your Bloodquest?'
'Perhaps. I seek to find one of those you know as the
Brotherhood of the Dark Path.'
Martin raised an eyebrow at Arutha. 'What have you
to do with the moredhel?'
'I seek a large moredhel of the Yabon hills, who wears
a topknot, so' - he pantomimed a horsetail of hair - 'and
three scars upon each cheek. I have been told he has
come to the south on some black mission. I had hoped to
hear of him from travellers, for one like that will stand
out among the moredhel of the south.'
Arutha said, 'if he has no tongue, then he attacked us
on our way to Sarth.'
'That is him,' said Baru. 'The tongueless one is called Nurad. He is a
chieftain of the Clan Raven moredhel, blood enemies of my people since the
dawn of time. even his own people fear him. The scars upon his face speak
of pacts with dark powers, though little beyond that is known. He has not
been seen in years, since before the Riftwar when moredhel moss-troopers
raided across the hill borders of Yabon. "He is the cause of the
Bloodquest. He was seen again two months ago when he led a band of
black-armoured warriors past one of our villages. For no good reason he
paused long enough to destroy the village, burning every building and
killing everyone there except the herdsboy who described him to me. It was
my village.' With an almost resigned sigh he said, 'if he was near Sarth,
then there I must go next. This moredhel has lived too long.'
Arutha nodded to Laurie, who said, 'Actually, Baru, if
you stay with us, he'll most likely come looking for you.'
Baru looked quizzically at the Prince, and Arutha told
him of Murmandamus and his servants and the quest for
Anita's cure. When he had finished, the Hadati grinned and there
was no humour in it. "Then I shall take service with you,
Highness, if you will accept me, for fate has thrown us
together. You are hunted by my enemy and I will have
his head before he can have yours.'
'Good,' said Arutha. "You will be welcome, for we
follow a dangerous road.'
Martin stiffened, and in almost the same instant Baru
was coming to his feet, moving towards the trees behind
the Duke. Martin signalled for silence, and before the
others could move, he vanished into the trees, a step
behind the hillman. The others began to move until
Arutha motioned for them to hold. As they stood motionless
in the dark, they heard what had alerted Martin and
the Hadati. Echoing through the night was the sound of
riders coming down the road from Ylith.
Long minutes passed, then the sound of hoofbeats
passed, heading southwest. A few more minutes after,
martin and Baru reappeared. Mar'tin whispered, "riders,
a dozen or more, moving down the road as if there were
demons coming behind.'
"Black armour?' asked Arutha.
Martin said, "No, these were human, and hard to see in
the dark, but I judge them a rough crew.'
"The Nighthawks could have hired extra bashers if they
needed. Ylith's that sort of town,' Laurie said.
Jimmy agreed. 'Maybe only one or two were Nighthawks,
but hired knives kill as quickly as any others.'
Baru said, "They head towards the Free Cities.'
'They'll be back,' said Roald. Arutha turned to look at
the mercenary in the gloom, barely seeing his face in the
faint moonlight. 'Your Baron Talanque has a new customs
shed five miles down the road. My caravan passed it this
afternoon. Seems there's been some new smuggling from
Natel of late. They'll found out from the guards no-one
passed this night, and they'll be back."
"then,' said Arutha, 'we must be away. The question is
how we reach Elvandar. I planned on travelling the road
NOrth to Yabon, then going west.'
Roald said, "From Ylith north you'll meet some who
know you from the war, Highness. Especially around
LaMut. Had I any wits about me, I'd have figured it out
after a while.'
'Then which way?' asked the Prince.
Martin said, 'We could head straight west from here,
take the South Pass, and run the Grey Towers along the
western face through the GreenHeart. It's dangerous,
But . . ."
Arutha said, 'But goblins and trolls are known enemies.
it is how we shall travel. Now let's be off.'
They mounted and moved out, Martin in the lead.
Slowly they wended their way through the dark and silent
forests, hgeading west.
Arutha hid his anger, forcing it down within.
 The uneventful trip from Sarth to Ylith had
lulled him, making him forget for a while what dangers
existed. But the ambush at the in
and the pursuing riders had turned his awareness back to the dangers.
Murmandamus and his agents might have been denied
their magic means of finding him, but they still had a net
out, one that had nearly caught him.
Jimmy rode last in line, and he watched behind for a
while, hoping not to see signs of followers. Soon sight of
the road was lost in the darkness, and the boy returned
his attention to Roald's and Laurie's backs, the only
things he could see before him.

13

Stardock

The wind whipped the water to white foam.
Gardan looked at the distant shore of Stardock, wishing
he could ride to the academy instead of trusting fate to
keep a barge right side up. Still, it was on an island. He
had endured sea voyages before, but despite a lifetime
living in a seaport he hated travelling over water, though
he would never openly admit as much.
They had left Krondor by ship, travelling down the
coast until they entered the narrows between the Bitter
Sea and the Sea of Dreams, which was more of a giant
saltwater lake than a true sea. At Shamata they had
commandeered horses and followed the river Dawlin to
its source, the Great Star Lake. Now they stood waiting
for the barge to put in. It was poled by two men in simple
tunics and trousers, local peasants by the look of them.
In a moment Gardan, Brother Dominic, Kasumi, and six
Tsurani guards would step aboard and be poled to Stardock
Island, almost a mile away. Gardan shivered in the unseasonably
cool air. It was
spring, but the late afternoon air had none of the warmth
expected at this time of year. 'I'm the fugitive from a hot
land, Captain,' said Kasumi with a chuckle.
Gardan's voice had little humour in it as he replied,
'No, it is cold here, but there's something else. I've felt
nothing but dark foreboding since leaving the Prince.'
Brother Dominic said nothing, but his expression showed
he shared the feeling.
, Kasumi nodded. He had stayed in Krondor to guard
the King, and when Arutha's messages arrived he had
' accepted Lyam's charge to accompany Gardan and the
Ishapian monk to ' Stardock. Besides his desire to visit
Pug again, there had been something in Lyam's orders
that made him believe the King counted the monk's safe
arrival at Stardock vital.
The barge put in to shore and one of the two bargemen
stepped ashore. 'We'll have to make two trips to carry
the horses sir,' he said.
Kasumi, who was senior, said, "That will be fine.' He
indicated five of his men and said, "These will go first, we
will follow.'
Gardan said nothing about going second, he had no
desire to rush the coming ordeal. The five Tsurani led
their animals aboard and took up position silently. Whatever
they might think about journeying on the wallowing
barge, they maintained their stoic demeanour.
The barge put out, and Gardan watched quietly. Save
for faint signs of activity on the far island, the southern
shore of the Great Star Lake was deserted. Why, wondered
Gardan, would anyone choose to' live in such
isolation? Legend had it a star fell from the sky, creating
the lake. But whatever the lake's origins, no community
had ever arisen upon its shores.
The lone remaining Tsurani guard said something in
his own language to Kasumi, pointing to the northeast.
Kazumi looked where the man pointed.
Gardan and Dominic looked as well. In the distance,
close to the horizon and coming before the approaching
night, several winged figures could be seen gliding swiftly
towards them. 'What are they?' asked Kasumi. 'Those
are the biggest birds I've seen on your world so far. They
appear to be nearly man-sized.'
Gardan squinted. Suddenly Dominic shouted, 'Ishap's
grace! everyone back to shore.
The bargemen looked back from 'where they were
Making slow, steady progress. Seeing Gardan and the
others draw weapons, they quickly pushed back for land.
The approaching figures could now be seen as they raced
towards the party on shore. One of the boatmen cried
out in fear and prayed to Dala for protection.
The nude creatures were grotesquely human-shaped,
male, with blue skins and powerfully muscled torsos.
Shoulder and chest muscles flexed as giant batlike wings
beat the air. Their heads resembled those of hairless
monkeys, and each waved a long, prehensile tail. Gardan
counted: there were an even dozen of them. With impossibly
high shrieks, they dived straight at the party on
shore. As his horse bolted, Gardan lunged to one side, barely

avoiding the outstretched claws of one of the creatures.
A scream sounded behind, and Gardan glimpsed one of
the bargemen being carried aloft by a creature. It hovered
for an instant with a powerful beat of its wings, holding
the man by the neck. With a contemptuous cry it ripped
out the bargeman's throat and dropped him. In a spray of
blood, the man fell to the water.
Gardan struck out at one of the creatures, which sought
to grab him in the same manner. The blade struck it
squarely in the face, but the creature only withdrew with
a back beat of its wings. There was no apparent mark
upon it where the sword had struck. It grimaced, shook
its head, then launched another attack. Gardan fell back,
focusing his entire concentration on the creature's outstretched
hands. Very humanlike fingers ending in long
talons raked across the steel of his blade as he parried.
The captain wished his horse had stood long enough for
him to retrieve his shield.
"What manner of beings are these?' Kasumi shouted as

the barge got close enough for the five Tsurani to leap for
the shore.
Dominic's voice could be heard somewhere behind.
'They are elemental creatures, fashioned by black arts.
Our weapons have no eHect.'
The Tsurani seemed unperturbed despite that fact,
attacking the creatures as they would any enemy, with no
hesitation. While the blows received did no damage to the
creatures, they obviously inflicted pain, for the Tsurani's
onslaught caused the creatures to withdraw and hover for
a moment.
Gardan looked and found Kasumi and Dominic close
by. They both had shields' and stood at the ready. Then
the creatures were on them again. A soldier screamed,
and Gardan caught a glimpse of a Tsurani falling nearby.
Gardan saw Kasumi avoid the rush of two of the
creatures, using sword, shield, and agility to good advantage.
But the captain knew there was no hope of survival,
for it would be only a matter of time before they tired
and slowed. The creatures showed no sign of fatigue and
were attacking with as much fury as when they arrived.
Dominic lashed out with his mace, and a creature
warbled a high-pitched note of pain. If weapons could
not cut the magically constructed hide, then at least they
could break bones. The creature fluttered in a circle,
trying desperately to stay aloft, but slowly it approached
the ground. From the way one wing lamely flapped, it
was obvious Dominic had broken its shoulder.
Gardan dodged another attack and danced to one side.
Behind the two creatures attacking him he saw the
wounded one touch the ground. As soon as its feet made
contact with the earth, the creature emitted an earsplitting
howl of pain and burst into a shower of sparkling
energies. With a flash, near-blinding in the evening
gloom, it vanished, leaving only a smoking patch on the
ground. Dominic shouted, 'They are elementals of the
air! They cannot abide the touch of earth!'
Gardan swung a mighty overhand blow at the creature
on his right. The force of the blow drove the creature
downwards. It made the briefest contact with the earth,
but that was enough. Like the other, it exploded into
sparks. In panic, it reached out a hand and gripped the
trailing tail of the creature beside it, as if trying to pull
itself away from the destruction below. The sparking
energy travelled up the tail of the second creature and it,
too, was consumed.
Kasumi whirled about and saw that three of his six
men lay dead. The creatures now numbered nine, and
they swarmed the remaming fighters, though there was
now an element of caution in their approach. One
swooped down towards Dominic, who braced for the
attack. Instead of reaching out for the monk, the elemental
beat backwards against the air, buHeting the cleric,
seeking to knock him down. Gardan raced up behind the
creature, ducking to avoid claws reaching for him. He
lunged forwards, barely keeping sword in hand, and
threw his arms about the dangling legs of the creature
facing Dominic. He hugged them close, his face buried
against the naked thigh of the thing. His stomach churned
at the stench from the elemental's body, the odour of
things long dead and best buried. His unexpected weight
pulled the thing downwards. It shrieked and beat its
wings furiously, but it was off balance and Gardan pulled
it to the ground. Like the others, it burst into sparks.
Gardan rolled away, feeling pain erupt along his armS
and chest, where he had gripped the creature when it
exploded: he had been burned in the process of destroying
it. He ignored the pain and felt a growing hope. Those
on the shore numbered seven - Gardan, Kasumi,
Dominic, three soldiers, and a boatman wielding a pole and
the creatures were now only eight.
For a moment the attacking elementals chose to circle
overhead, out of reach of the surviving soldiers' weapons.
As they began to peel off for a swooping attack, a
shimmering began a short distance down the beach from
the defenders. Gardan prayed to Tith, god of soldiers,
that it wasn't the arrival of another attacker. One more
foe would surely tip the balance and overwhelm them.
With a flickering of light a man appeared upon the
beach, dressed in simple black tunic and trousers. Gardan
and Kasumi at once recognized Pug and shouted a warning
to him. The magician calmly surveyed the situation.
One' creature, seeing an unarmed opponent, howled with
maniacal glee and dived for him.
Pug stood his ground, showing no defence. The diving
creature reached a point less than ten feet from him, then
crashed into an invisible barrier. As if it had struck a
stone wall, the creature crumpled to the ground. It
vanished in another blinding flash.
Shrieks of panic sounded overhead, as the remaining
creatures now understood that here was a foe beyond
their powers to harm. As one, the seven remaining
creatures turned and began a headlong flight northwards.
Pug waved his hands and suddenly a blue fire danced
upon his upraised palms. He cast it after the fleeing
creatures. The sphere of blue fire sped after the elementals
and caught up with them as they winged furiously
over the water. Like a cloud of pulsating light, it enveloped
them. Strangled cries of pain could be heard as the
elementals contorted in midair and fell twitching into the
lake. As each touched the surface of the water, it erupted
into green flame, consumed as it vanished under the
rippling surface of the lake.

Gardan watched Pug as he approached the nearly
exhausted soldiers. There was something unusually
sombre in Pug's expression and his gaze held a hint of
power Gardan had never seen before. Abruptly, Pug's
expression changed as he relaxed. His face now looked
young, boyish in spite of his nearly twenty-six years of
age. With a sudden smile he said, "Welcome to Stardock,
gentlemen.

A warm fire filled the room with a cosy glow. Gardan
and Dominic rested in large chairs set before the fireplace,
while Kasumi sat on cushions, Tsurani fashion.
Kulgan dressed the captain's burns, fussing like a
mother over her idiot child. The two had known each
other for years at Crydee, well enough for Kulgan to take
a rough tone with the captain. "How you could be foolish
enough to grab on to one of those things - anyone knows
that contact with an elementally dependent creature when
it returns to a primal state involves the release of energies,
mostly heat and light.'
Gardan, tired of being scolded, said, "Well, I didn't
know. Kasumi, did you know? Dominic?'

Kasumi sat laughing as Dominic said, "As a matter of
fact, I did know.'
'You are no help at all, priest,' muttered the captain.
"Kulgan, if you are done, can we eat? I've been smelling
that hot food for nearly an hour and it's close to making
me go mad.'
Pug laughed, leaning against the wall next to the
hearth. "Captain, it's more like ten minutes.'
They were sitting in a room in the first floor of a large
building under construction. Kasumi said, "I am glad the
King permitted me to visit your academy, Pug.'
'And I as well,' said Brother Dominic. "While we at
Sarth appreciate those copies of works you've forwarded
to us so far, we are still vague about what your plans are.
We seek to know more.'
Pug said, 'I am pleased to host any who come with the
love of learning, Brother Dominic. Perhaps someday we
may claim repayment of our slight hospitality and visit
your fabled library.'
Kulgan's head came around at that. "I would be pleased
to claim that right, friend Dominic.'
"Anytime you call, you'll be welcome.",' answered the
monk.
'Watch this one,' said Gardan with a tilt of his head
towards Kulgan. "Lose him in those underground vaults
and you'll never find him. He's as passionate for books as
a bear for honey.'
A striking woman with dark hair and large, dark eyes
entered the room, followed by two servants. All carried
platters with food, and as she placed hers upon the long
table at the other end of the room from where the men
were gathered, she said, 'Please, it is time for supper.'
Pug said, 'Brother Dominic, this is my wife, Katala.'
The monk nodded deferentially and said, 'My lady.'
She smiled at him. "Please, Katala. We tend to the
informal here.'
The monk again inclined his head as he came to the
indicated chair. He turned at the sound of a door opening,
and for the first time since the captain had met him, the
monk's composure cracked. William came hurrying into
the room, the green-scaled form of Fantus behind.
'Ishap's mercy! Is that a firedrake?'
William ran to where his father stood and hugged him,
eyeing the newcomers cautiously. Kulgan said, 'This is
Fantus, lord of this estate. The rest of us live here by his
sufferance, though he suffers William's company best.'
The drake's gaze shifted to Kulgan for a moment as if
he agreed totally.. Then his large rEd eyes returned to
contemplating the table and what lay upon it.
Pug said, 'William, say hello to Kasumi.'
William bowed his head slightly, smiling. He spoke in
the Tsurani tongue, and Kasumi answered, laughing.
Dominic looked interested. Pug said, 'My son is fluent
in both the King's Tongue and the tsurani language. My
wife and I keep him practising both, for many of my
works are in the Tsurani language, That is one of the
problems I have in bringing the art of the Greater Path to
Midkemia. Much of what I do is the result of how I think,
and I think magic in the Tsurani language. William's going
to be a great help someday, aiding me in discovering
ways to do magic in the King's Tongue so I can teach
those who live here.'
Katala said, 'Gentlemen, the food grows cold.'
'And my wife does not permit talking of magic at this
table,' said Pug. Kulgan snorted at this, and Katala said, 'If I did, these
two would hardly get a mouthful.'
Gardan moved with alacrity, despite his discomfort
saying, "I don't have to be warned more than once.' He
sat down and immediately one of the servants began
filling his platter.
Dinner proceeded pleasantly, with talk of small things.
As if the terrors of the day had vanished with the night,
all mention of the grim events that had brought Gardan,
Dominic, and Kasumi to Stardock were ignored. Nothing
about Arutha's quest, the threat of Murmandamus, or
the portent of the abbey was said. For a short time no
discord existed. For a brief hour, the world was a pleasant
place with old friends, and new guests, enjoying one
another's company.
Then William was making his good-nights. Dominic
was struck by the resemblance between boy and mother,
though his manner of moving and speaking was in open
imitation of his father. Fantus had been fed from William's
 plate and padded out of the room behind him.
'I still can hardly credit my senses where that drake is
concerned,' said Dominic after they had left.
'He's been Kulgan's pet as long as I can remember,'
said Gardan.
Kulgan, who was lighting a pipe, said, "Ha~ No longer.
That boy and Fantus have been inseparable since the day
they met.'
Katala said, 'There is something beyond the ordinary
with those two. At times I think they understand each
other.'
Dominic said, 'Lady Katala, there is little about this
place which is not beyond the ordinary. This gathering
together of magicians, this construction, that is all
extraordinary. '
Pug rose and led the others to the chairs near the fire.
cBut understand that upon Kelewan, when I studied at
the Assembly, what you see aborning here was ancient
and established. The brotherhood of magicians was an
accepted fact, as was the common sharing of knowledge.'
Kulgan puffed contentedly upon his pipe. cWhich is as
it should be.'
Pug said, "We can discuss the rise of the academy
Stardock tomorrow, when I can show you our community.
I'll read the messages from Arutha and the Abbot tonight.
I know all that led up to Arutha's leaving Krondor,
Gardan. What occurred between there and' Sarth?'
The captain, who had been feeling drowsy, forced
himself alert and quickly told of the events from Krondor
to Sarth. Brother Dominic remained silent, since the
captain forgot nothing of significance. Then it was the
monk's turn, as he explained what he knew of the attack
upon the abbey. When he had finished, Pug and Kulgan
asked several questions but withheld comment.
Pug said, 'The news you carry is cause for the deepest
concern. Still, the hour is late, and I think there are
others upon this island who should be consulted. I suggest
we show these tired and sore gentlemen to their rooms
and begin discussions in earnest tomorrow.'
Gardan, who could feel a yawn beginning, stifled it and
nodded. Kasumi, Brother Dominic, and the captain were
escorted from the room by Kulgan, who bade the others
good night.

Pug left the fireside and crossed to a window, where he
stood watching the little moon's light reflecting off the
water as it peeked through the cloud cover. Katala came
up behind her husband and her arms went around his
waist.
'You are troubled by this news, husband.' It was a
statement, not a question.
'As always, you know my mind.' He turned within the
circle of her arms and drew her' closer, smelling the
sweetness of her hair 'as he kissed her cheek. "I had hoped
we would live out our lives with the building of this
academy and the raising of children our only concerns.'
She smiled up at him, dark eyes mirroring the unending
love she felt for her man. 'Among the Thuril we have a
saying."'Life is problems. Living is solving problems."'
He smiled at this. She said, "Still, it is true. What do you
think of the news Kasumi and the others brought?'
"I do not know.' He stroked her brown hair. "Lately I
have felt a growing gnawing feeling inside. I have thought
it simply worry over the progress we make here in
building the academy, but it is more than that. My nights
have been filled with dreams.'
'I know, Pug. I have seen you struggle in your sleep.
You have yet to speak to me of them.'
He looked at her. "I had no wish to trouble you, love. I
thought them mere ghosts of memories from the times of
trouble. But now I. . . I am not sure. One returns with
frequency, coming more often lately. A voice in a dark
place cries out to me. It seeks my aid, begs for help.'
She said nothing, for she knew her husband and would
wait until he was ready to share his feelings. Finally he
said, 'I know the voice, Katala. I have heard it before,
when the time of troubles was full upon us at its most
dreadful moment, when the outcome of the Riftwar hung
in the balance, when the fate of two worlds rested upon
my shoulders. It's Macros. It's his voice I hear.'
Katala shivered and hugged her husband close. The
name of Macros the Black, whose library served as the
seed for this growing academy of magic, was one she
knew well. Macros was the mysterious sorcerer, neither
of the Greater Path like Pug, nor of the Lesser Path like
Kulgan, but something else. He had lived long enough to
seem eternal and he could read the future. He had always
had a hand in the conduct of the Riftwar, playing some
cosmic game with human lives for stakes only he understood.
He had rid Midkemia of the rift, the mapc bridge
between her own homeworld and her new one. She
nestled closer to Pug, her head on his chest. Most of all,
she knew why Pug was troubled. Macros was dead.

Gardan, Kasumi, and Dominic stood at ground level
admiring the work proceeding above. Workers contracted
in Shamata were laying course after course of stone,
building up the high walls of the academy. Pug and
Kulgan stood nearby, inspecting the newest plans submitted
by the Masterbuilder in charge of construction.
Kulgan motioned for the newcomers to join them. "This
is all vital to us, so you will please indulge us a bit, I
trust,' said the stout mage. 'We have been at work for
only a few months and we are anxious to see the work
uninterrupted. '
Gardan said, 'This building will be immense.'
'Twenty-five storeys tall, with several higher towers for
observing the heavens.'
Dominic said, 'That is incredible. Such a building could
house thousands.'
Kulgan's blue eyes sparkled merrily. 'From what Pug
has told me, it is but a part of what he knew in the City
of Magicians on the other world. There an entire city has
grown together into a single gigantic edifice. When we
have compl'eted our work, years from now, we shall have
only one-twentieth part of that, or less. Still, there is room
to grow, if needs be. Someday, perhaps, the academy may
cover this entire island of Stardock.'
The Masterbuilder left, and Pug said, "I am sorry for
the interruption, but some decisions needed to be made.
Come, let's continue the inspection.'
Following the wall, they rounded a corner to come
upon a group of buildings looking like nothing so much
as a small village. Here they could see men and women in
various manner of dress, Kingdom and Keshian, moving
among the buildings. Several children played in a square
at the centre of the village. One of them was William.
Dominic looked about and saw Fantus lying near a
doorway in the sunlight, a short distance away. The
children were frantically trying to kick a ball fashioned of
rags bound in leather into a barrel. The game seemed
devoid of rules of conduct or play.
Dominic laughed at the sight. "I used to play the same
game on Sixthdays when I was a boy.'
Pug smiled. 'As did I. Much of what we plan has yet to
be implemented, so for the present the children's duties
are occasional things. They don't seem to mind.'
'What is this place?' asked Dominic.
'For the time being, it is the home of our young
community. The wing where Kulgan and my family have
our rooms, as well as some instruction rooms, is the only
part of the academy ready for use. It was the first section
completed, though construction still continues above on
the upper floors. Those who travel to Stardock to learn
and serve at the academy live there, until more quarters
can be made ready in the main building.' He motioned
for them to follow him into a large building that dominated
the village. William left the game and tagged along
beside his father. Pug placed his hand upon the boy's
shoulder. "How are your studies today?'
The boy made a face. 'Not so good. I gave up today.
Nothing works as it should.'
Pug's expression turned serious, but Kulgan gave William
a playful push back towards the game. "Run along,
boy. Worry not, your father was equally hardheaded
when he was my student. It will come in time.'
pug half smiled. "Hardheaded?'
Kulgan said, "Perhaps "slow-witted" would be a better
way to put it.'
Entering the door, Pug said, 'Until the day I die
Kulgan will make sport of me.'
The building turned out to be a hollow shell. Its only
purpose seemed to be to house a large table running the
length of it. The only other feature of the room was a
hearth. The high ceiling was supported by rafter beams,
from which hung lanterns that gave off a cheery light.
Pug pulled out a chair at the end of the table, signalling
for the others to sit as well.
Dominic was pleased with the fire. Even if it was late
spring, this day was chilly. He said, 'What of the women
and children about?'
Kulgan withdrew his pipe from his belt and began to
stuff the bowl with tabac. "The children are the sons and
daughters of those who have come here. We have plans
to organize a school ' for them. Pug has some strange
notions about educating everyone in the Kingdom someday,
though I don't see universal education becoming the
vogue. The women are either the wives of magicians or
magicians themselves, women commonly regarded as
witches.'
Dominic appeared troubled. "Witches?'
Kulgan lit his pipe with a flame on the end of his finger
and exhaled a cloud of smoke. 'What is in a name? They
practise magic. For reasons I do not understand, men
have at least been somewhat tolerated for practising
magic in many places, while women have been driven
from nearly every community where they are discovered
to have power.'
Dominic said, 'But it is held that witches gain their
powers by serving dark forces.'
Kulgan waved the notion aside. 'Nonsense. That is
superstition, if you'll forgive my being blunt. The source
of their power is no more dark than your own, and their
behaviour is usually a great deal kinder than that of some
of the more enthusiastic, if misguided, servants of some
temples.'
Dominic said, 'True, but you are speaking of a recognized
member of a legitimate temPle.'
Kulgan looked directly at Dominic. 'Forgive the observation,
but in spite of the Ishapian reputation for a more
worldly view than that of other orders, your remarks are
profoundly provincial. So what if these poor wretches do
not toil within a temple?
'If a woman serves in a 'temple she is holy, and if she
comes to her power in a hut in the woods she is a witch?
Even my old friend Father Tully wouldn't swallow that
piece of dogmatic tripe. You are not speaking of any
inherent question of good or evil, you're talking about
who's got a better guild.'
Dominic smiled. 'You, then, seek to build a better
guild?'
Kulgan blew out a cloud of smoke. 'In a sense, yes,
though that is less the reason for what we do than is
trying to codify as much magic lore as possible.'
Dominic said, "Forgive my harsh questions, but one of
my charges was to determine the source of your motivation.
The King is your powerful ally, and our temple
was concerned that there might be some hidden purpose
behind your activities. It was thought, as long as I was
coming here . . . '
Pug finished, 'You might as well challenge what we do
and see what we say?'
Kasumi said, 'As long as I have known Pug, he has
acted'with honour.'
Dominic went on, 'Had I a single doubt, I would have
said nothing now. That your purposes are only the highest
is not in doubt. Just . . .'
Pug and Kulgan both said, 'What?'
"It is clear you seek to establish a community of
scholars, more than anything else. That, in and of itself,
is laudable. But you will not always be here. Someday
'this academy could be a powerful tool in the wrong
hands.'
Pug said, (We are taking every precaution to avoid that
pitfall, believe me.'
Dominic said, "I do.
Pug's expression changed, as if he had heard something.
'They are coming,' he said.
Kulgan watched with rapt attention. 'Gamina?' he
asked in a whisper. '
pug nodded, and Kulgan made a satisfied ''Ah' sound.
'The contact was better than ever. She grows in power
each week.'
Pug explained to the others, 'I read the reports you
brought last night and have summoned here one who I
think may help. With him comes another.'
Kulgan said, 'The other is . . . one able to send
thoughts and receive them with remarkable clarity. At
present she is the only one we have found able to do so.
Pug has told of a similar ability on Kelewan, used during
his training, but it required preparation of the subject.'
Pug said, "It is like the mind touch used by some
priests, but there is no need for physical contact, or even
proximity, it seems. Nor is there the attendant danger of
being caught up in the mind of the one touched. Gamina
is a rare talent.' Dominic was impressed. Pug continued,
"She touches the 'mind and it is as if she speaks. We have
hopes of someday understanding this wild talent and
learning a way to train others to it.'
Kulgan said, "I hear them approaching.' He rose.
"Please, gentlemen, Gamina is something of a timid soul
one who has undergone difficult times. Remember that
and be gentle with her.'
Kulgan opened the door and two people entered. The
man was ancient, with a few stray wisps of hair, like
white smoke, falling to his shoulders. His hand was on
the other's shoulder and he walked stooped over, showing
some slight deformity under his red robe. From the milky
orbs that stared blankly ahead it was obvious the old man
was blind.
But it was the girl who commanded their attention.
She wore homespun and appeared about seven years old,
a tiny thing who clutched at the hand upon her shoulder.
Her blue eyes were enormous, illuminating a pale face of
delicate features. Her hair was almost as white as the old
man's, holding only a hint of gold. What struck Dominic,
Gardan, and Kasumi was an overwhelming feeling that
this child was perhaps the most beautiful they had ever
seen. Already they could see in those childish features
the promise of a woman of unsurpassed beauty.
Kulgan guided the old man to a chair next to his own.
The girl did not sit, but chose to stand beside the man,
both hands on his shoulder, fingers flexing nervously, as
if she feared to lose contact with him. She looked at the
three strangers with the expression of a cornered wild
thing. She took no pains to disguise her distrust.
Pug said, 'This is Rogen.'
The blind man leant forward. "whOm do I meet?' His
face, despite the age it showed, was alive and smiling,
uptilted as if to hear better. It was evident that he, unlike
the girl, enjoyed the prospect of meeting newcomers.
Pug introduced the three men, who sat opposite Kulgan
and Rogen. The 'blind man's smile broadened. "I am
pleased to meet you, worthy gentlemen.
Then Pug said, 'This is Gamina.'
Dominic and the others were startled when the girl's
voice sounded in their heads. Hello.
The girl's mouth had not moved. She was motionless,
her enormous blue eyes fixed upon them.
Gardan said, gDid she speak?'
Kulgan answered, 'With her mind. She has no other
power of speech.'
Rogen reached up to pat the girl's hands. 'Gamina was
born with this gift, though she nearly drove her mother
crazy with her silent crying.' The old man's face became
solemn. 'Gamina's mother and father were stoned to
death by the people of her village, for having birthed a
demon. Poor, superstitious people they were. They feared
to kill the baby, thinking she would revert to her "'natural"
form and slay them all, so they left her in the forest to die
of exposure. She was not yet three years old.'
Gamina looked at the old man with penetrating eyes.
He turned to face her, as if he could see her, and said,
'Yes, that is when I found you.'
To the others he said, "I was living in the forest, in an
abandoned hunter's lodge I had discovered. I also was
driven from my home village, but that was years earlier. I
foretold the death of the town miller and was blamed for
it. I was branded a warlock.'
Pug said, 'Rogen has the power of second sight, perhaps
to compensate for his blindness. He has been without sight since birth.'

Rogen smiled broadly and patted the girl's hands. 'We
are alike, we two, in many ways. I had grown to fear
what would become of the girl when I die. ' He interrupted
himself to speak to the girl, who had become agitated at
his words. She stood shaking, her eyes welling up with
tears. 'Hush," he scolded gently. "I will, too - everyone
does. I hope not too soon, though,' he added with a
chuckle. He returned to his narrative. 'We came from a
village near Salador. When word reached us of this
wondrous place, we started our journey. It took six
months to walk here, mostly because I am so old. Now
we have found people like ourselves, who view us as a
source of knowledge, not a source of fear. We are home.'
Dominic shook his head, amazed that a man his age
and a child had walked hundreds of miles. He was
obviously moved. "I am beginning to understand another
part of what it is you do here. Are there many more like
these two?'
Pug said, 'Not as many as I would like. Some of the
more established magicians refuse to join us. Others fear
us. They will not reveal their abilities. Others simply do
not yet know we exist. But some, like Rogen, seek us
out. We have nearly fifty practitioners of magic here.'
'That is a great many,' said Gardan.
Kasumi said, 'In the Assembly there were two thousand
Great Ones.'
Pug nodded. 'We also had nearly that number who
followed the Lesser Path. And of those who rose to the
black robe, the sign of the Greater Magician, each was
but one in five who began training, under conditions
more rigorous than we are capable of here or would
desire.'
Dominic looked at Pug. "What of the others, those
who failed their training?'
'They were killed,' Pug answered flatly.
Dominic judged it a topic Pug did not wish to pursue.
A flicker' of fear crossed the girl's face and Rogen said,

'Hush, hush. No one will hurt you here. He was speaking
of a faraway place. Someday you will be a great teacher.'
The girl relaxed, and a faint flicker of pride in her
expression could be seen. It was obvious she doted upon
the old man.
Pug said, 'Rogen, there is something taking place that
your powers may aid us in understanding. Will you help?'
'Is it that important?'
"I would not ask if it were not vital. Princess Anita lies
in peril and Prince Arutha is at constant risk from some
unkn'own enemy.'
The girl became worried, or at least that was how
Gardan and Dominic read her expression. Rogen cocked
his head, as if listening, then said, "I know it is dangerous,
but we owe Pug a great deal. He and Kulgan are the only
hope for people like ourselves.' Both men appeared
embarrassed by this but said nothing. 'Besides, Arutha is
the King's brother, and it was their father who gave us all
this wonderful island to ~live on. How would people feel if
they knew we could have helped but didn't?'
Pug spoke softly to Dominic. 'Rogen's second sight
is different from any I've heard of. Your order is
reputed to have some knowledge of prophecy.' Dominic
nodded. "He sees . . . probabilities is the best way I can
describe it. What may happen. It seems to require a great
deal of his energies, and though he is tougher than he
looks, he is still quite old. It is easier if only one person
speaks to him, and as you have the best understanding of
the nature of the magic that has occurred, I think it
would be better for you to tell him all you know.' Dominic
agreed. Pug said, 'If everyone else will please remain
silent. '

Rogen reached across the table and took the cleric's
hands. Dominic was ~surprised at the strength remaining
in those withered old - fingers. While not able to foretell
himself, Dominic was ' familiar with the process as per-formed
by those of his order. He cleared his mind, then
began to tell his story from when Jimmy first ran foul of
the Nighthawk upon ' the rooftop to when Arutha left
Sarth. Rogen remained silent. Gamina did not move.
When Dominic spoke of the prophecy naming Arutha "Bane of Darkness'
the old man' shuddered and his lips
moved silently.
The mood in the room became ominous as the monk
spoke. Even the fire semed to dim. Gardan found he
was hugging himself.~ he sat.
When the monk haltted, Rogen continued to clutch his
hand, not allowing the other to pull away. His head was
raised, neck arched sllightly backwards, as if he were
listening to something distant. His lips worked without
sound for a while, then slowly words were forming,
though so quietly they were not distinguishable. All at
once he spoke clearly. , his voice firm. 'There is a . . .
presence . . . a being_ I see a city, a mighty bastion of
towers and walls. Upon these walls stand proud men willing
to defend it to the end.. Now . . . it's a city under siege. I
see it overwhelmed, with its towers ablaze . . . It's a city
being murdered. A great savage host runs in its streets as
it falls. Those who fight are sorely pressed and withdraw
to a keep. Those who rape and loot . . . all are not
human. I see those of the Dark Path and their goblin
servants. They roam the streets, their weapons dripping
blood. I see strange ladders being raised to storm the
keep, and strange bridges of light. Now it burns, all
burns, all is in flames _ . it is over.
There was a moment of silence, then Rogen continued.
"I see a host, gathered on a plain, with strange banners
flapping. Black-armoured figures sit silently on horseback,
showing twisted shapes on shields and tabards. Above
stands a moredhel . . .' The old man's eyes teared.
"He is  . . beautiful . . . He . . . is evil. He wears the
mark of the dragon. He stands upon a hill while below him
Armies march past singing battle songs. Great machines of
war are pulled by miserable human slaves."
Then, there was silence. Them, "I see another city. Its
image shifts and wavers, for its future is less certain. Its
walles lie breached, and its streets are stained red. The
sun hides its face behind grey clouds . . . and the city
cries outin anguish. Men and women are chamed in lines
without ed. They are . . . whipped by creatures who
taunt '~ and torment them. They are being herded to a
great square, where they face their conqueror. A throne
is irrected  atop a mound . . . a mound of bodies. Upon it
is the beautiful one, the evil one. At his side stands
another, a black robe hides his features. Behind the
both is another something. . . I cannot see it, but it is
real, it exists, it is  . . dark . . . it is insubstantial, without
being, not truly there, but . . . it is also there. It touches
The one on the throne.' Rogen tightly clutched Dom inic's
hands. ..."Wait . . .' he said, then hesitated. His hands
       began to tremble, then in pitious tones, nearly a sob, he
cried, Oh gods of mercy! It can see me! It can see me!
The old mans lips trembled, while Gamina clutched at
his shoulder, , eyes wide, holding him closely, terror written
upon her little face. Suddenly Rogen's lips parted to
Emit a terrible groan, a sound of the purest agony and
dispare and his body went rigid.
Without warning, a lance of fire, a stab of pure pain,
errupted in the minds of all who sat in the room. Gamina
screamed in silence.
Gardan clutched at his head, nearly fainting' from the
whitehot flash of searing agony. Dommic's face
went ashen and he reeled back in his chair under the
onslaught of the cry as if struck a physical blow. Kasumi's
eyes screwed closed as he fought to rise. Kulgan's pipe
fell from slack lips as he clutched his temples. Pug
staggered to his feet, using every shred of his magic
power to erect some sort of mental barrier against the
tearing in his mind. He pushed back the blackness that
sought to overwhelm him, reaching out to touch the girl.
'Gamina,' he croaked.
The girl's mental screaming continued unabated and
she tore frantically at the old man's tunic, a mindless act,
as if she sought somehow to snatch him back from
whatever horror he faced. Her large eyes were wide and
her voiceless hysterics nearly drove those around her to
madness. Pug lunged forward and grabbed her shoulder.
Gamina ignored the touch, continuing to scream for
Rogen. Mustering his powers, Pug forced aside the terror
and pain in the girl's projected thoughts for a brief
moment.
Gardan's head fell forward' onto the table, as did
Kasumi's. Kulgan lurched upright, then fell back into his
chair, stunned. besides Pug and Gamina, only Dominic
had managed to retain consciousness. Something inside
him had struggled to reach out to the girl, no matter how
much he wished to retreat from the pain being visited
upon him by her.
The girl's primitive terror nearly brought Pug to his
knees, but he forced himself on. He cast a spell, and the
girl fell forward. At once the pain ceased. Pug caught
her, but the effort drove him back and he staggered into
his chair. He sat cradling the unconscious girl, stupefied
by the onslaught.
Dominic felt as if his head would burst but hung on to
consciousness. The old man's body was still rigid, nearly
bowed back with pain, his lips working feebly. Dominic
incanted a spell of healing, one used to cease pain. Finally
Rogen went limp, seeming to collapse into his chair. But
his face was still a mask of terror and pain, and he cried
out in a hoarse whisper words the monk could not
understand, before he lapsed into unconsciousness.
Pug and the monk exchanged confused looks. Dominic
felt blackness overtake him and, before he passed out,
wondered why the magician suddenly looked so
frightened.

Gardan paced the room where they had dined' the night
before. Next to the fire, Kulgan said, "You'll wear a
furrow in the stones of the floor if you don't sit down.'
Kasumi rested quietly on a cushion beside the magician.
Gardan lowered himself next to the Tsurani and said,
"It's this infernal waiting.' Dominic and Pug, with the aid
of some healers in the community, were tending to
Rogen. The old man had lain near death since he had
been carried from the meeting house. Gamina's mental
scream 'had touched all within a mile of her, though
striking those at a distance with less force. Still, several
people near the building had been rendered senseless for
a time. When the cries had stopped, those with their wits
about them had rushed to see what had occurred. They
had found all in the meeting house unconscious.
Katala was soon on the scene and ordered them all
carried to the quarters where she could oversee their
care. The others had recovered in a few hours, but Rogen
had not. The vision had begun in midmorning, and now
it was after supper.
Gardan struck hand with fist and said, 'Damn. I was
never meant for this sort of business. I ' am a soldier.
These monsters of magic, these nameless powers . . . Oh
for an enemy of flesh and blood!'
TOO well do I know what you can do to a flesh-andblood
enemy,' Kasumi said. Kulgan looked interested,
and Kasumi said, '"In the early years of the war, the
captain and I faced one another at the siege of Crydee. It
wasn't until we were exchanging histories that I discovered
he was second to Prince Arutha during the siege,
or he that I led the assault.'
The door opened and a large man entered, removing a
great cloak. He was bearded and weather-beaten in
appearance, looking like a hunter or woodcutter. He
smiled slightly and said, 'I go away for a few days and
look who wanders in.'
Gardan's dark face broke into a 'broad smile and he
rose, extending his hand. 'Meecham!'
They shook and the man called Meecham said, "Well
met, Captain.' Kasumi followed suit, for Meecham was
an old acquaintance. He was a franklin, a free man with
his own land in service to Kulgan, though he was more a
friend to the magician than any sort of servant.
Kulgan said, "Any luck?'
The forester absently stroked 'the scar on his left cheek
as he said, 'No. All fakes.'
,Kulgan said to the others, cWe heard of a travelling
caravan of fortune-tellers and gypsies, camped a few days
this side of Landreth. I sent Meecham to discover if any
of them were true talents.'
"There was one,' said Meecham. 'Might have been
what he seemed, but he quieted down when I told him
where I was from. Maybe he'll show up on his own
hook.' He looked around the room. 'All right, isn't
anyone going to tell me what's going on here?'
As Kulgan finished recounting everything to Meecham
the door opened and further conversation was interrupted.
William entered leading Gamina by the hand. The
old man's .ward looked even more pale than when Gardan
had seen her the day before. She looked at Kulgan,
Kasumi, and Gardan and her voice entered their minds. I
am sorry I caused so much pain. I was frightened.
Kulgan slowly extended his arms, and the girl gingerly
allowed him to gather her up onto his ample lap. With a
gentle hug, he said, "It is all right, lass. We understand.'
The others smiled at the girl reassuringly and she
seemed to relax. Fantus came padding into the room.
William threw him a quick look and said, 'Fantus is
hungry.'
Meecham said, 'That beast was born hungrY.'
No, came the thought. He said he was hungry. No one
remembered to feed him today. I heard.
Kulgan gently held the little girl away from him so he
could look at her. 'What do you mean?'
He told William he was hungry. Just now. I heard him.
Kulgan looked at William. 'William, can you hear
Fantus?'
William looked at Kulgan with a curious expression.
'Of course. Can't you?'
They talk to each other all the time.
Kulgan's face became animated. 'This is wonderful! I
had no idea. No wonder you two have been so close.
William, how long have you been able to speak to Fantus
this way?'
The boy shrugged. 'Ever since I can remember. Fantus
has always talked to me.'
'And you could hear them speak to each other?'
Gamina nodded. 'Can you speak to Fantus?'
No. But I can hear him when he talks to William. He
thinks funny. It is hard.
Gardan was astonished by the conversation. He could
hear Gamina's answers in his head, as if he were listening.
From observing the girl's private remarks to Rogen the
day before, he realized that she obviously was able to
speak with whomever she chose in a selective way.
William turned towards the drake. 'All right." he said
in aggravated tones. He said to Kulgan, 'I'd better go to
the kitchen and get him something. Can Gamina stay
here?'
Kulgan gave the girl a gentle hug and she nestled
deeply into his 'lap. 'Of course.'
William dashed from the room, and Fantus hurried
after, the prospect of a meal motivating him to an atypical
display of speed. When they were gone, Kulgan said,
"Gamina, can William speak to' other creatures besides

Fantus?'
' I don't know. I'll ask him.
They watched in fascination as the girl's head cocked
to one side, as if she were listening to something. After a
moment she nodded. He said only sometimes. Most animalS
aren't very interesting. They think a lOt about food
and other animals, is all.
Kulgan looked as though he had been given a present.
'This is wonderful. Such a talent. We have never heard of
a case of a human communicating directly with animals.
Certain magicians have hinted at such an ability in the
past, but never like this. We shall have to investigate this
fully.'
Gamina's eyes widened as her face took on an expectant
look. She sat up and her head came around to face
the door, and an instant later Pug and Dominic entered
Both looked weary, but there was no sign of the sorrow
Kulgan and the others had feared.
Before the question could be asked, Pug said, 'He still
lives, though he was deeply afflicted.' He noticed Gamina
in Kulgan's lap, looking as if that physical contact were
somehow vital to her. 'Are you better?' Pug asked. She
ventured a slight smile and a nod.
Some communication passed between them and Pug
said, "I think he will recover. Katala will stay at his side.
Brother Dominic has proved a great help, for he is versed
in healing arts. But Rogen is very old, Gamina, and if he
doesn't recover, you must understand and be strong.'
Gamina's eyes brimmed with moisture, but she nodded
slightly. Pug came over and drew up a chair, as did the
monk. Pug seemed to notice the addition of Meecham
for the first time and they greeted each other. A quick
introduction to Dominic was made, and then Pug said,
'Gamina, you could be a big help to us. Are you willing?'
.How?
'There has never been an occurrence like today's to my
knowledge. I must know what made you so afraid for
Rogen.' There was something in Pug's manner that
revealed deep concern. He masked it well, so as not to
distress the child, but it still wasn't completely hidden.
Gamina looked frightened. She shook her head and
something passed between the little girl and Pug. Pug
said, "Whatever it was, it could make the difference in
Rogen's living. Something we do not understand is
involved in this, we should know about it.'
Gamina bit 'her lower lip slightly. Gardan was struck
by the fact the girl was showing considerable bravery.
From what little he had heard of the girl's lot, it had been
a terrible one. To grow up in a world where people were
always suspicious and hostile, and those thoughts were
always heard, must have kept the child on the edge , of
madness. For her to trust these men at all bordered on
the heroic. Rogen's kindness and love must have been
endless to counter-balance the pain this child had known.
Gardan thought that if any man deserved the occasionally
bestowed title of 'saint' the temples used for their heroes
and martyrs, then it was Rogen.
More conversation passed between Pug and Gamina,
Still silent. Finally Pug said, 'Speak so we might all hear.
All these men are your friends, child, and they will need
to hear your story to stop Rogen and others from being
hurt again.'
Gamina nodded. I was with Rogen.
'What do you mean?' asked Pug.
When he used his second sight, I went with him.
'How were you able?' said Kulgan.
Sometimes when someone thinks things, or sees things,
I can see or heor what they do.' It's hard when they aren't
thinking at me. I can do it best with Rogen. I could' see
what he saw, in my mind.
Kulgan pushed the child slightly away so he might
better look at her. 'Do you mean to say you can see
Rogen's visions?' The girl nodded. 'What about dreams?'
Sometimes. .
Kulgan hugged her tightly. 'Oh, what a fine child you
are! tWo miracles in one day. Thank you, wonderful
child!'
Gamma smiled, the first happy expression any of them
had seen. Pug threw him a questioning look, and Kulgan
said, 'Your son can speak to animals.' Pug's jaw dropped,
and the stout magician continued, "But that is not important
for the moment. Gamina, what did Rogen see that
hurt him so badly?'
Gamina began to tremble and Kulgan held her closely.
It was bad. He saW a city burning and people being hurt
by bad creatures.
pug said, 'Do you know the city? Is it some place you
and Rogen have seen?'
Gamina shook her head, her big eyes seemingly as
round as saucers. No. It was just a city.
"What else?' asked Pug gently.
The girl shivered. He saw something . . . a man.? there
was a strong feeling of confusion, as if she was dealing
with concepts she could not fully comprehend. The man.?
Saw Rogen.
Dominic said softly, 'How could something in a seeing
sense the seer? A vision is a prophetic look at what might
happen. What sort of thing could sense a magic witness
across the barriers of time and probability?'
Pug nodded. 'Gamina, what did this 'man" do to
Rogen?'
It.? He? reached out and hurt him. He.? said some words.

Katala entered the room, and the child looked up at
her expectantly. Katala said, 'He's fallen into a deep,
normal 'sleep. I think he will recover now.' She came up
behind the chair Kulgan sat in and leant on the back, she
reached down and cupped Gamina's chin. 'You should
be getting to bed, child.'
Pug said, 'A little longer.' Katala sensed her husband
was concerned with something vital and nodded agrEement.
He said, 'Just before he fainted, Rogen used a
word. It is important for me to know where he heard that
word. I think he heard the thing, the bad man, in the
vision use the word. I need to know what Rogen heard
the bad man say.. Can you remember the words, Gamina?'
She laid her head down on Kulgan's chest and nodded
very slightly, obviously afraid to remember them. Pug
spoke in reassuring tones. 'Would you tell them to us?'
No. But I can show you.
"How?' asked Pug.

I can show you what Rogen saw, she answered. I just
Can.
'All of us?' asked Kulgan. She nodded. The tiny girl
sat up in Kulgan's lap and took a deep breath, as if
steeling herself. Then she closed her eyes and took them
all into a dark place.
Black clouds raced overhead, angry on the bitter wind.
Storms threatened the city. Massive gates lay shattered,
for engines of war had worked their destruction on wood
and steel. Everywhere fires burned out of control as a
city died. Creatures and men savaged those found hiding
in cellars and attics, and blood pooled in the gutters of
the streets. In the central market a mound of bodies had
been piled nearly twenty feet high. Atop the corpses
rested a platform of dark wood, upon which a throne had
been placed. A moredhel of striking appearance sat on
the throne, surveying the chaos his servants had visited
upon the city. At his side stood a figure draped all in
black robes, deep hood and large sleeves hiding every
physical clue as to what manner 'of creature it was.
But the attention of Pug and the others was drawn to
something beyond the pair, a presence of darkness, some
strange unseen thing that could be felt. Lurking in the
background, it was the true source of power behind the
two upon the platform. The black-robed creature pointed
at something, and a green-scaled hand could be seen.
Somehow, the presence behind the two made contact,
made itself known to the onlookers. It knew it was being
observed, and its response was one of anger and disdain.
It reached out with alien powers and spoke, carrying to
those in the room a message of grey desparr.
All in the room shook themselves from the girl's vision.
Dominic, Kulgan, Gardan, and Meecham appeared disturbed,
chilled by the menace in what the girl had shown
them, though it could only be a shadow of' the firsthand
experience.
But Kasumi, Katala, and Pug were rocked. When the
child had finished, tears streaked down Katala's face and
Kasumi had lost his usual Tsurani mask, his face ashen
and drawn. Pug appeared hardest hit of all as he sat back
heavily on the floor. He lowered his head, withdrawing
inside himself for a moment.
Kulgan looked about in alarm. Gamina seemed more
distressed by the reaction than by recalling the image.
Katala sensed the child's distress and picked her up from
Kulgan's lap, hugging her closely. Dominic said, 'What is
it?'
Pug looked up and, more than anything, appeared
suddenly fatigued, as if the weight of two worlds once
again was his to bear. Finally he spoke, slowly. 'When
Rogen was at last freed of the pain, the last words he
spoke were ""the Darkness, the Darkness." That is what
he saw behind those two figures. The Darkness Rogen
saw spoke these words: "intruder, whoever you are,
wherever you are, know my power is coming. My servant
prepares the way. Tremble, for I come, As was in the
past, so shall be in the future, now and forever. Taste my
power." He, it, must have somehow reached out and
touched Rogen then, causing the terror, the pain.'
Kulgan said, 'How can this be?'
Softly, hoarsely, Pug spoke. "I do not know, old friend.
But now a new dimension is added to the mystery of who
seeks Arutha's death and what lies behind all the black
arts being thrown at him and his allies.'
Pug buried his face in his hands a Moment, then looked
around the room. Gamina clung to Katala, and all eyes
were upon Pug.
Dominic said, 'But there is something else.' He looked
at Kasumi and Katala. 'What is that tongue? I heard it as
well as you, as I heard Rogen's foreign words, but know
it not at all.'
It was Kasumi who said, 'The words were . . . ancient,
a language used in the temples. I could only understand
a little. But the words were Tsurani.'

14

ElvandBr

The forest was silent.
Large branches, ancient beyond memory, arched high
overhead, blocking out most of the day's sunlight, the
surrounding environment revealed' a soft green glow,
devoid of direct shadows and full of deep recesses of
dimly perceived paths, winding away.
They had been in the elven forests for over two hours,
'since midmorning, and as yet had seen no sign of elven
activity. Martin had thought they would be intercepted
shortly after crossing the river Crydee, but as yet no elf
had been seen.
baru spurred his horse forward and pulled even with
Martin and Arutha. 'I think we are being watched,' said
the Hadati.
Martin said, "For some minutes now. I only caught a
glimpse a while ago.'
.if the elves are watching, why don't they come forward?'
asked Jimmy.
Martin said, 'it may not be elves who watch us. We
will not be completely free from care until we are within
the bounds of Elvandar. Keep alert.'
For several minutes they rode, then even the chirping
birds ceased their noise. The forest seemed to be holding
its breath.' Martin and Arutha pushed their mounts
through narrow paths, barely wide enough for a man
afoot. Suddenly the silence was broken by a raucous
hooting, punctuated by shrieks. A stone came hurling
past Baru's head and a storm of rocks, twigs, and sticks
followed. Dozens of small hairy figures jumped from
behind trees and brush, howling furiously while pelting
the riders with missiles.
Arutha charged forward, fighting to keep his mount
under control, as did the others. He steered through the
trees while ducking under branches. As he moved towards
four or five child-sized creatures, they shrieked in terror
and leapt away in different directions. Arutha singled out
one and rode up behind it. The creature found itself
blocked by a deadfall, a jumbled mass of fallen trees,
heavy brush, and a large rock. It turned to face the
Prince.
Arutha had his sword drawn and reined in, ready to
strike. Then all anger flowed out of him at the sight
before him. The creature made no effort to attack, but
instead backed as far as possible into the tangle, an
expression of pure terror on its face.
It was a very manlike face, with large, soft brown eyes.
A short but human nose was set above a wide mouth.
The creature's lips were drawn back in a mock snarl,
showing an impressive arrangement of teeth, but the eyes
were wide with fear and large tears flowed down its hairy
cheeks. Otherwise it looked like a small ape or large
monkey.
A loud racket erupted around Arutha and the creature
as more of the small man-things surrounded them. They
howled fiercely, pounding on the ground with savage
fury, but Arutha saw it was all show, there was no real
threat in their actions. Several feigned attacks, but ran
shrieking in terror if Arutha turned to face them.
The others came riding up behind, 'and the little creature
Arutha had trapped cried piteously. Baru pulled up
alongside the Prince and said, 'As soon as you charged,
these others fled after you.'
The riders could see that the gathered creatures were
abandoning their mock fury and their expressions were
now concerned. They chattered to one another in what
sounded like words.
Arutha put away his sword. 'We will not hurt you.'
As if they understood, the creatures quieted. The one
who was trapped watched guardedly.
Jimmy said, 'What are they?'
Martin said, 'I don't know. Man and boy I've hunted
these woods and I've never seen their like.'
"They are gwali, Martin Longbow.'

The riders turned in their saddles and were greeted by
the sight of a company of five elves. One of the creatures
raced to stand before the elves. He pointed an indicting
finger towards the riders. In a singsong voice he said,
"Calin, mans come. Hurt Ralala. Make stop hurt her.'

Martin left his horse. "Well met, Calin!' He and the elf
embraced, and the other elves greeted him in turn. Then
Martin led them to where
his companions waited and
said, 'Calin, you remember my brother.'

'Greetings, Prince of Krondor.'
'Greetings, Elf Prince.' He cast a sidelong glance at the
surrounding gwali. "You save us from being
overwhelmed. '
Calin smiled. "I doubt it. You look a capable company.'
He came up to Arutha. "It has been a while since we last
spoke. What brings you to our forests, Arutha, and with
so strange an entourage? Where are your guardsmen and
banners?' 'That is a long tale, Calin, and one I wish to share with

your mother and Tomas.'
Calin agreed. To an elf patience was a way of life.
With the tension broken, the gwali cornered by Arutha
broke and ran to join the others of her kind, who stood
around watching. Several examined her, grooming her
hairy hide, patting her reassuringly after her ordeal.
Satisfied she was unharmed, they quieted down and
watched the elves and humans. Martin said, 'Calin, what
are these creatures?' Calin laughed, his pale blue eyes crinkling at the

corners. He stood as tall as Arutha but was even more
slender than the rangy Prince. "As I have said, they are
called gwali. This rascal is named Apalla.'' He patted the
head of the one who had spoken to him. "He is something
of a leader among them, though I doubt they really
entertain the concept. It may be he is simply more
talkative than the others.' Looking at the rest of Arutha's
company, he said, "Who are these with you?'
Arutha made introductions and Calin said, "You are
welcome to Elvandar.'
"What is a gwali?' asked Roald.

Calin said, 'These are, and that is the best answer I can
give. They have lived with us before, though this is their
first visit in a generation. They are simple folk, without
guile. They are shy and tend to avoid strangers. When
afraid, they will run unless they are cornered, then they
will feign attack. But don't be misled by those ample
teeth, they're for tough nuts and insect carapaces.' He
turned his attention to Apalla. "Why did you try to scare
these men?'
The gwali jumped up and down excitedly. 'Powula
make little gwali.' He grinned. "She don't move. We
afraid mans hurt Powula and little gwali.'
"They are protective of their young,' said Calin in

understanding. "Had you actually tried to hurt Powula
and the baby, they would have risked attacking you. Had
there been no birthing, you never would have seen them.'
He said to Apalla, 'it is all right. These men are friends.
They will not hurt Powula or her baby."
Hearing this, the other gwali came pouring out from
the protecting trees and began examining the strangers
With open curiosity. They tugged at the riders' clothing,
which was quite different from the green tunics and
brown trousers the elves wore. Arutha suffered the examination
for only a minute, then said, "We should get to
your mother's court soon, Calin. If your friends are
finished?'
'Please,' said Jimmy, his nose wrinkling as he pushed
away a gwali who hung from a branch next to him. 'Don't
they ever bathe?'
"Unfortunately, no,' answered Calin. He said to the
gwali, "That's enough, we must go.' The gwali accepted
the instruction with good grace and quickly vanished
among the trees, except Apalla, who seemed more' assertive
than the rest. 'They will continue that sort of thing all
day if you allow them to, but they don't mind when you
shoo them off. Come.' He told Apalla, "We go to Elvandar.
Tend to Powula. Come when you will.'
The gwali grinned and nodded vigorously, then scampered
off after his brethren. In a moment there was no
hint that a gwali existed within miles.
Calin waited until Martin and Arutha had remounted.
'We are only a half day's travel to Elvandar.' He and the
other elves began their run through the forest. Except for
Martin, the riders were surprised at the pace the elves
set. It was not taxing for the mounts, but for a human
runner to keep it up for a half day would be close to
impossible.
After a short while Arutha drew even with Calin, who
loped along at an easy pace. 'Where did those creatures
come from?'
Calin shouted, 'No one knows, Arutha. They're a
comic lot. They come from some place to the north,
perhaps beyond the great mountains. They will show up,
stay a season or two, then vanish. We sometimes call
them the little wood ghosts. Even our trackers can't
follow them after they depart. It's been nearly fifty years
since their last visit, and two hundred since the one
before that.' Calin breathed easily as he ran in long, fluid
strides.
"How fares Tomas?' asked Martin.
"The Prince Consort fares well.'
'What of the child?'
"He is well. He is a fit, handsome child, though he may
prove somewhat different. His heritage is . . . unique.'
"And the Queen?'
"Motherhood agrees with her,' answered her elder son

with a smile.
They fell into silence, for Arutha found it difficult to
continue the conversation while negotiating the trees,
even if Calin did not. Swiftly through the forest they
travelled, each passing minute bringing them closer to
Elvandar and hopes fulfilled . . . or hopes dashed.
The journey was soon completed. One moment they
were travelling through heavy forest, then they entered a
large clearing. This was the first glimpse any of them,
save Martin, had had of Elvandar.
Giant trees of many colours rose high above the surrounding
forest. In the afternoon light the topmost leaves
seemed ablaze with colour where golden sunlight struck
them. Even from this distance, figures could be seen
along the high paths spanning the gaps between boles.
Several of the giant trees were unique to this place, their
leaves a dazzling silver, gold, or even white. As the day's
shadows deepened, they could be seen to have a faint
glow of their own. It was never truly dark in Elvandar.
As they crossed the clearing, Arutha could hear the
astonished comments of his companions.
Roald said, "Had I known . . . you'd have had to tie
me up to keep me from coming along.'
Laurie agreed. "It makes the weeks in the forest worth
it.'
Baru said, "The tales of our singers do not do justice to
it. '
Arutha awaited a comment from Jimmy, but when the
voluble lad said nothing, Arutha looked behind. Jimmy
rode in silence, his eyes drinking in the splendour of this
place, so alien from anything seen in his life. The usually
jaded boy had finally encountered something so oUtside
his experience, he was truly awestruck.
They reached the outer boundary of the tree-city and
on all sides could hear the soft sounds of a busy community.
A hunting party approached from another quarter,
bearing a large stag, which they carried off to be
butchered. An open area outside the trees was set aside
for the dressing of carcasses.
They reached the trees and reined in. Calin instructed
his companions to care for the horses and led Arutha's
party up a circular stairway carved into the trunk of the
biggest oak the Prince and the others had ever seen.
Reaching a platform at the top, they passed a group of
elver fletchers practising their craft. One saluted Martin,
who returned the greeting and briefly inquired if he might
impose upon their generosity. With a smile, the fletcher
handed Martin a bundle of finely craNed bowshafts, which
the Duke placed in his nearly empty quiver. He spoke
quick thanks in the elver tongue and he and his companions
continued onwards.
Calin led them up another steep stairway to a platform.
He said, "From here it may prove difficult for some of
you. Keep to the centre of the paths and platforms and
do not look down if you feel discomforted. Some humans
find the heights distressing.' He said the last as if it was
almost incomprehensible.
They crossed the platform and mounted more steps,
passing other elves hurrying about their business. Many
were dressed like Calin, in simple woods garb, but others
wore long colourful robes, fashioned of rich fabrics, or
bright tunics and trousers, equally colourful. The women
were all beautiful, though it was a strange, inhuman
loveliness. Most of the men looked young, about Calin'S
age. Martin knew better. Some elves hurrying past were
young, twenty, thirty years of age, while others, equally
young in appearance, were several hundred years old.
Though he looked younger than Martin, Calin was past a
hundred and had taught Martin hunting skills when the
Duke had been a boy.
They continued along a walkway, nearly twenty feet
wide, stretching along enormous branches, until they
came to a ring of trunks. In the midst of the trees a large
platform had been constructed, almost sixty feet across.
Laurie wondered if even a single drop of rain could worm
its way through the thick canopy of branches overhead to
fall on a royal brow. They had reached the Queen's
court.
Across this platform they walked, to a dais upon which
two thrones were erected. In the slightly higher of the
two sat an elver woman, serenity enhancing her already
near-flawless beauty. Her face with its arched brows and
finely chiselled nose was dominated by her pale blue
eyes. Her hair was light red-brown, with streaks of gold like
Calin's - giving it the appearance of being struck by
sunlight. Upon her head rested no crown, only a simple
circlet of gold that pulled back her hair, but there was no
mistaking Aglaranna, the Elf Queen,
Upon the throne to her left sat a man. He was an
imposing figure, taller than Martin by two inches. His
hair was sandy-blond and his face looked young, while
still holding some elusive ageless quality. He smiled at
the sight of the approaching party, giving him an even
younger look. His face was similar to the elves', yet with
a difference. His eyes lacked colour to the point of being
grey, and his eyebrows were less arched. His face was
less angular, possessing a strong, square jaw. His ears,
revealed by the golden circlet that held back his hair,
were slightly pointed, less upswept than those of the
elves. And he was much more massive in the chest and
shoulders than any elf.
Calin bowed before them. 'Mother and Queen, Prince
and Warleader, we are graced by guests.'
Both rulers of Elvandar rose and walked forward to
greet their guests. Martin was greeted with affection by
the Queen and Tomas, and the others were shown courtesy
and warmth. Tomas said to Arutha, 'Highness, you
are welcome.'
Arutha replied, "I thank Her Majesty and His
Highness.'
Seated around the court were other elves. Arutha
recognized the old counsellor Tathar, from his visit to
Crydee years before. Quick introductions were made.
The Queen bade them rise and led everyone to a reception
area adjoining the court, where they were all informally
seated. Refreshments were brought, food and wine,
and Aglaranna said, 'We are pleased to see old friends' she
nodded at Martin and Arutha - "and to welcome
new' - she indicated the others. 'Still, men rarely visit us

without cause. What is yours, Prince of Krondor?'

Arutha told them his tale while they dined. From first
to last the elves sat silently listening. When Arutha was
finished, the Queen said, 'Tathar?'
The old counsellor nodded. 'The Hopeless Quest.'
Arutha asked, "Are you saying you know nothing of
Silverthorn?'
'No,' replied the Queen. 'The Hopeless Quest is a
legend among our people. We know the aelebera plant.
We know of its properties. That is what the legend of the
Hopeless quest tells us. Tathar, please explain.'
The old elf, the first Jimmy and the others had seen
who showed some signs of age - faint lines around the
eyes and hair so pale it bordered on white - said, "in the
lore of our people, there was a Prince of Elvandar
who was betrothed. His beloved had been courted by a
moredhel warrior, whom she spumed. In his wrath the
moredhel poisoned her with a draught brewed from the
aelebera and she fell into a sleep unto death. Thus the
Prince of Elvandar began the Hopeless Quest, in search
of that which could cure her, the aelebera, the Silverthorn.
Its power is such that it can cure as well as kill.
But the aelebera grows only in one place, Moraelin, in
your language the Black Lake. It is a place of power,
sacred to the moredhel, a place where no elf may go. The
legend says the Prince of Elvandar walked the edge of
Moraelin until he had worn a canyon around it. For he
may not enter Moraelin, nor will he leave until he has
found that which will save his beloved. It is said he walks
there still.'
Arutha said, "But I am not an elf. I will go to Moraelin,
if you'll but show me the way.'
Tomas looked around the assembly. "We shall plaCe
your feet upon the path to Moraelin, Arutha,' he said,
"but not until you've rested and taken counsel. Now we
shall show you places where you may refresh yourselves
and sleep until the night-time meal.'
The meeting broke up as the elves moved away, leaving
Calin, Tomas, and the Queen with Arutha's group.
Martin said, 'What of your son?'
With a broad smile, Tomas motioned for them to
follow. He led them through a bough-covered passage to
a room, its vault formed by a great elm, where a baby lay
sleeping in a cradle. He was less than six months old
from the look of him. He slept deeply, dreaming, little
fingers flexing slightly. Martin studied the child and could
see what Calin meant by saying his heritage was unique.
The child looked more human than elver, his ears being
only slightly pointed and possessing lobes, a human trait
unknown among elves. His round face looked more like
that of any chubby infant, but there was an edge to it,
' something which said to Martin that this was a child
who was more his father's than his mother's. Aglaranna
reached down and gently touched him while he slept.
Martin said, "What have you named him?'
Softly the Queen said, "Calis.' Martin nodded. In the
elver tongue it meant 'child of the green' , referring to
life and growth. It was an auspicious name.
Leaving the baby, Martin and the others were taken to
rooms within the tree-city of Elvandar, where they found
tubs for bathing and sleeping mats. All were quickly
clean and asleep, save Arutha, whose mind wandered
from an image of Anita asleep to a silver plant growing
on the shore of a black lake.

Martin sat alone, enjoying the first evening of his first
visit to Elvandar in a year. As much as any place, even
castle Crydee, this was his home, for as a boy he had
played and been one with the elver children.
'Soft elver footsteps caused him to turn. "Galain,' he
said, happy to see the young elf, cousin to Calin. He was
martin's oldest friend. They embraced and Martin said,
'I expected to see you sooner.'
'i've just returned from patrolling along the northern
edge of the forests. Some strange things are going on up
' there. I hear you may have some light to shed on what
they may be. '
'A small candle flicker, perhaps,' said Martin. "Some
evil is at play up there, have no doubt.'
He filled Galain in, and the young elf said, "Terrible
deeds, Martin.' He sounded genuinely sorry to hear about
Anita. 'Your brother?' The question, in elvish fashion,
carried a variety of nuances in the intonation, each
concerning itself with a different aspect of Arutha's trials.
'He perseveres, somehow. He puts it all out of his
mind sometimes, other times he is nearly overwhelmed
by it. I don't know how he keeps from going mad. He
loves her so very deeply.' Martin shook his head.
'You've never wed, Martin. Why?'
Martin shook his head. 'i've never met her.'
'You are sad.'
'Arutha's a difficult man at times, but he is my brother
I remember him as a child. Even then it was hard to get
close to him. Perhaps it was his mother's death, when he
was still so young. He kept things distant. For all the
toughness, for all the hard edges, he's easily hurt.'
"You two are much alike.'
'There is that,' Martin agreed.
Galain stood quietly next to Martin awhile. "We shall
help, as much as we can.'
.We must go to Moraelin.'
The young elf shivered, an unusual display even in one
so inexperienced. "That is a bad place, Martin. It is called
Black Lake for a reason that has nothing to do with the
colour of the water. It is a well of madness. The moredhel
go there to dream dreams of power. It lies on the Dark
Path '
'it was a Valheru place?
Galain nodded yes.
'Tomas?' Again the question carried a variety of meanings.
Galain was especially close to Tomas, having followed
him during the Riftwar.
'He will not go with you. He has a new son. Calis will
be tiny for so short a time, only a few years. A father
should spend that time with his baby. Also, there is
the risk.' Nothing more needed to be said, for Martin
understood. He had watched the night Tomas had almost
succumbed to the mad spirit of the Valheru within him.
It had nearly cost Martin his life. It would be some time
before Tomas felt secure enough to challenge his own
heritage, to again awaken that dread being contained
within. And he would venture into a Valheru place of
power only when he felt circumStances were grave enough
to justify the risk.
Martin smiled his crooked smile. 'Then we shall go
alone, we humans of meagre talents.'
Galain returned the smile. 'You are many things, so I
doubt your talents meagre.' Then he lost the smile. "Still,
you would do well to take counsel with the Spellweavers
before you go. There is dark power at Moraelin, and
magic overcomes much in the way of strength and
courage. '
Martin said, 'We will. We speak soon.' He looked to
where an elf approached, Arutha and the others behind.
'I think now. Will you come?'
I've no place in the circle of elders. ' Besides, I have
not eaten for a day. I will rest. Come talk if you need.'
'I will.'
Martin hurried to join Arutha. They followed the elf,
who led the humans back to the council. When all were
seated before Aglaranna and Tomas, the Queen said,
"Tathar, speak for the Spellweavers: say what counsel
you have for Prince Arutha.'
Tathar stepped into the centre of the court circle and
said, "Strange things have been occurring for some turns
of the middle moon. We expected southward movement
of the moredhel and goblins back to the homes they were
driven from during the riftwar, but this has not come to
be. Our scouts in the north have tracked many bands of
goblins heading across the Great Northern mountains
into the Northlands. Moredhel scouts have come
unusually close to our borders. "The gwali come to us again because they
say they don't like the place they lived in any more. It is hard to
make sense of them at times, but we know they came
from the north. so what you have told us, Prince Arutha, causes us deep
concern. First, because we share your sorrow. Second,
because the manifestations you tell of bespeak a power of
great evil with a long reach and far-flung minions. But
most of all, because of our own ancient history.
'Long before we drove the moredhel from our forests,
for taking to the Dark Path of Power, the elver people
were one. Those of us who lived in the forests were
farther from our masters, the Valheru, and because of
this were less attracted to the intoxication of power
dreams. Those of us who lived close to our masters were
seduced by those dreams and became the moredhel.' He
looked to the Queen and Tomas, and both nodded.
"What is little spoken of is the cause of our divorcement
from the moredhel, who once were our blood. Never
before has any human been told all."
" In the dark era of the Chaos wars, many changes in
the lands occurred. From the people of the elves, four
groups rose.' Martin leant forward, for as much as he
knew of elvenkind, more than almost any man alive, this
was all new to him. Until this moment he had always
believed only the moredhel and elves were the sum total
of elvenkind. "The most wise and powerful, numbering

the greatest Spellweavers and scholars, were the eldar.
They were the caretakers for all that their masters had
plundered from across the cosmos, arcane works, mystical
knowledge, artifacts. and riches. It was they who first
began fashioning what is now Elvandar, lending it magic
aspect. They vanished during the Chaos Wars, for they
were among our masters' first servants, and it is supposed
that being very close to them, they perished with them
Of the elves and Brotherhood of the Dark Path, the
eledhel and moredhel in our tongue, you know something.
But there were yet other kin of ours, the glamredhel,
which name means '"the chaotic ones" or "the mad
ones". They were changed by the Chaos Wars, becoming
a nation of insane, savage warriors. For a time elves and
moredhel were one, and both were warred upon by the
mad ones. Even after the moredhel were driven from
Elvandar, they remained the sworn enemy of the glamredhel.
We speak little of these days, for you must remember
that while we speak of eledhel, moredhel, and glamredhel,
all elvenkind is one race, even to this day. It is
simply that some of our people have .chosen a dark way
of life.'
' Martin was astonished. For all he knew of elven culture,
he had, like other humans, always supposed the moredhel
a race apart, related to the elves but somehow different.
NoW he realized why the elves had always been reticent
in discussing their relationship to the moredhel. They saw
them as being one with themselves. In an instant Martin
understood. The elves mourned the loss of their brothers
to the lure of the Dark Path.
Tathar continued. 'Our lore tells of the time when the
last great battle in the north was fought, when the armies
of the moredhel and their goblin servants at last crushed
the glamredhel. The moredhel rampaged, obliterating our
mad cousins in a terrible war of genocide. Even to the
smallest infant, the glamredhel were supposedly slaughtered,
lest they again rise and challenge the supremacy of
the moredhel. It is the single blackest shame in the
memory of our race that one segment of our people
utterly destroyed another. But what concerns you is this, at the heart of
the
moredhel host stood a company called the Black Slayers,
moredhel warriors who had renounced their mortality to
become monsters with but one purpose: to kill for their
master. Once dead, the Black Slayers rise again to do
their master's bidding. Once risen from the dead, they
may be halted only by magic means, by utterly destroying
the body, or by cutting the hearts from out of their
bodies. Those who rode against you on the road to Sarth
were Black Slayers, Prince Arutha. ''
Before the battle of obliteration, the moredhel had
already gone far down the Dark Path, but something
caused them to descend to these new depths of horror,
the Black Slayers and the genocide. 'They had become a
tool of an insane monster, a leader who sought to emulate
the vanished Valheru and bring all the world under his
dominion. It was he who had gathered the moredhel
under his banner and who had given rise to the abomination
that was the Black Slayers. But in that last battle he
was wounded unto death, and with his passing the moredhel
ceased to be a nation. His captains gathered and
sought to determine a successor. They quickly fell out
with one another and became much like the goblins tribes,
clans, families, never able to combine under one
leader for long. The siege of Carss Keep, fifty years past,
was but a skirmish compared to the might the moredhel
mustered under this leader. But with his passing, an 'era
of moredhel might came to an end. For he was untRue, a
charismatic, hypnotic being of strange abilities, able to
weld the moredhel into a nation.
'The leader's name was murmandamus.'
Arutha said, 'is it possible he's somehow returned?'
'Anything may be possible. Prince Arutha, or so it
seems to one who has lived as long as I,' answered
Tathar. "It may be that one seeks to unite the moredhel
by invoking that ancient name, gathering them together
under one banner.
"Then there is this business of the serpent priest. So
despised are the Pantathians that even the moredhel
slaughter them when they find them. But that one of
them is a servant of this Murmandamus hints at dark
alliances. It warns us we may be facing forces beyond our
expectations. If the nations of the north are rising, we all
must again face a testing, one which will rival that of the
outworlders in peril for our peoples.'
Baru stood, in Hadati fashion, indicating he wished to
speak. Tathar inclined his head in Baru's direction, and
he said, 'Of moredhel lore my people know little, save
that the Dark Brothers are enemies of our blood. This
much I may add: Murad is counted a great chieftain,
perhaps the greatest living today, one who might command '
many hundreds of warriors. That he serves with the
Black Slayers speaks of Murmandamus's power. Murad
would serve only one whom he feared.' And one who
could visit fear upon Murad is one to be feared indeed.'
Arutha said, 'As I told the Ishapians, much of this is
speculation. I must be concerned with finding Silverthorn.'
But even as he uttered those words, Arutha knew
he was speaking falsely. Too much indicated that the
threat from the north was real. This was no rash of goblin
raids on northern farmers. This was a potential for
invasion surpassing that of the Tsurani. In the face of
this. his refusal to set aside all considerations except
finding a cure for Anita was shown for what it was: an
obsession.
'They may be one and the same, Highness,' said
Aglaranna. 'What seems to be unfolding here is a madman's
 desire to gather the moredhel and their servants
and allies under his dominion. To do so he must bring a
prophecy to fruition. He must destroy the Bane of Darkness.
And what has he accomplished? He has forced you
to come to the one place he is certain to find you.'
Jimmy sat upright, his eyes wide. 'He's waiting for
you!' he blurted, ignoring protocol. 'He's at this Black
Lake!' Laurie and Roald put their hands upon his shoulders,
in reassurance. Jimmy sat back, looking embarrassed.
Tathar said, "From the lips of youth . . . I and the
others have considered, and in our judgment, that is what
must be occurring, Prince Arutha. Since the gift of the
ishapian talisman, murmandamus must devise another
way to find you, or he risks his alliances dissolving. The
moredhel are much as others - they need to raise crops
and tend herds. Should Murmandamus tarry overlong in
bringing the prophecy to fruition, they may desert him,
save for those who have taken dark vows, such as the
Black Slayers. His agents will have passed word that you
have quit Sarth, and by now intelligence from Krondor
will tell him you are upon a quest for that which will save
your Princess. Yes, he will know you seek Silverthorn,
and he, or one of his captains, such as Murad, will be
waiting for you at Moraelin.' Arutha and Martin looked at each other. Martin
shrugged. 'We never thought it would be easy.'
Arutha regarded the Queen, Tomas, and Tathar. 'My
thanks for your wisdom. But we will go to Moraelin.'

Arutha looked up as Martin came to stand nearby
'Brooding?' asked the elder brother.
~Just . . . considering things, Martin.'
Martin sat next to Arutha, at the edge of a platform
near the rooms they had been given. In the nights
Elvandar glowed with a faint light, a phosphorescence
that kept the elver city cloaked in a soft magic. 'What
things are you considering?'
'That I may have let my preoccupation with Anita get
in the way of my duty.'
Martin said, 'Doubt? Well then; you reveal yourself at
last. Listen, Arutha, I've had doubts about this journey
from the start, but if you let doubt block you, nothing
gets done. You must simply make your best judgment
and act.'
'And if I'm wrong?'
'Then you're wrong.'
Arutha lowered his head until it rested against a
wooden rail. 'The problem is one of stakes. When I was a
child, if I was wrong I lost a game. Now I could lose a
nation.'
'Perhaps, but it still doesn't change the need to make
your best judgment and act.'
"'Things are getting out of hand. I wonder if it might
not be best to return to Yabon and order Vandros's army
into the mountains.'
'That might do it. But then there are places six may go
an army may not.'
Arutha smiled a wry smile. 'Not very many.'
Martin returned the smile, almost a mirror image.
'True, but still there are one or two. From what Galain
said about Moraelin, stealth and cunning will be more
important than strength. What if you marched Vandros's
army up there and found Moraelin lay just the other side
of a lovely road like the one up to the abbey at Sarth?
Remember the one Gardan avowed could be held by a
half-dozen grannies with brooms? I'll warrant Murmandamus
has more than a half-dozen grandmothers up
there. Even if you could battle Murmandamus's hordes
and win, could you order one soldier to give his life so
Anita should live? No, you and this Murmandamus play
a game, for high stakes, but still a game. As long as
Murmandamus thinks he can lure you up to Moraelin, we
have a chance of stealing in and getting Silverthorn.'
Arutha looked at his brother. 'We do?' he asked,
already knowing the answer.
"Of course. As long as we don't spring the trap, it

remains open. That is the nature of traps. If they don't
know we're already inside, we might even get out.' He
spent a quiet moment looking northwards, then said, 'it's
so close. It's just up in those mountains, a week from
here, no more. It's so close.' He laughed at Arutha. 'it
would be a shame to come so close and quit.'
Arutha said, 'You're mad.'
'Perhaps,' said Martin. 'But just think, it's so close.
Arutha had to laugh. 'All right. We leave tomorrow.'

The six riders set out the next morning, with the blessings
of the Elf Queen and Tomas. Calin, Galain, and two
other elves ran alongside the horsemen. As they lost sight
of the Queen's court, a gwali swung along through the
trees, crying, 'Calin!' The Elf Prince signalled a halt and the gwali dropped

from the branches and grinned at them. "Where mans
going with Calin?'
'Apalla, we take them to the northern road. Then they
travel to Moraelin.'
The gwali became agitated and shook his furry head.
'No go, mans. Bad place. Little Olnoli eaten there by
bad thing.' 'What bad thing?' said Calin, but the gwali ran off

shrieking in fright before an answer was forthcoming.
Jimmy said, "Nothing like a happy send-off.'
Calin said, 'Galain, return and find Apalla and see if
you can glean any sense from what he says.'
Galain said, 'i'll find out what he means and follow
after.' He waved to the travellers and headed back after
the gwali. Arutha motioned for the party to continue.
For three days the elves guided them to the edge of
their forests, up into the foothills of the Great Northern
Mountains. Then, at midday on the fourth day, they
came to a small stream, and on the other side they could
see the trail leading through the woodlands, towards a
canyon. Calin said, 'Here is the limit of our holdings.'
Martin said, 'What of Galain, do you think?'
'it may be he discovered nothing of worth, or it may
have taken him a day or two to find Apalla. The gwali
can be difficult to locate if they decide to be. If Galain
meets us, we'll direct him after you. He will overtake you
as long as you haven't crossed over into the heart of
Moraelin.'
"Where would that be?' said Arutha.
"Follow that trail for two days until you come to
a small valley. Cross it, and on the north face you'll see
a waterfall. A trail leads up from there, and atop the
plateau you'll' be near the top of the falls. Follow the
river upwards, until you reach its source. From that lake
you'll find a trail again moving upwards, again to the
north. That is the only way to Moraelin. You'll find a
canyon, which winds around the lake in a complete circle.
Legend says it is the tracks made by the mourning Elf
Prince, wearing the ground down around the lake. It is
called the Tracks of the Hopeless. There is only one way
into Moraelin, across a bridge made by the moredhel.
When you cross the bridge over the Tracks of the Hopeless,
you will be in Moraelin. There you will find the
Silverthorn. It is a plant with a light silver-green leaf of
three lobes, with fruit like red holly berries. You will
recognize it at once, for its name describes it: the thorns
are silver. If nothing else, get a handful of the berries. It
will lie close to the edge of the lake. Now go, and may
the gods protect you.'
With brief farewells the six riders moved off, Martin
and Baru in the lead, Arutha and Laurie following,
Jimmy and Roald bringing up the rear. As they followed
a turn, Jimmy glanced back, until he could no longer see
the elves. He turned eyes forward, knowing they were
now on their own, without allies or haven. He said a
silent prayer to Banath and took a deep breath.

15

Return

Pug stared into the fire.
The small brazier in his study threw a dancing pattern
of lights on the walls and ceiling. He ran his hand over
his face, feeling fatigue in the very fabric of his being. He
had laboured since Rogen's vision, sleeping and eating
only when Katala pushed him from his studies. Now he
carefully closed one of Macros's many books, he had
been reading them exhaustively for a week. Since confronted
with the impossibilities of Roger's vision, he had
sought every shred of information available to him..,Only
one other magic user upon this world had known anything
pertaining to the world of Kelewan, and that had been
Macros the Black. Whatever that dark presence in the
vision, it had spoken a language that fewer than five
thousand on Midkemia might even recognize - Pug
Katala, Laurie, Kasumi and his Tsurani garrison at
LaMut, and a few hundred ex-prisoners scattered around
the Far Coast. And of them all, only Pug could fully
understand the words spoken in Gamina's vision, for that
language was a distant, dead ancestor of the presentday
Tsurani tongue. Now Pug searched in vain through
Macros's library for some hint of what this dark power
might be.
Of the hundreds of volumes Macros had bequeathed to
Pug and Kulgan, only a third had been catalogued.
Macros, through his strange goblin-like agent, Gathis,
had provided a listing of each title. In some cases that
had proved helpful, for the work was well known by title
alone. In other cases it was useless 'until the book was
read. There were seventy-two works all called Magic,
and a dozen other instances of several books with like
nomenclature. Looking for possible clues to the nature of
what they faced, Pug had closeted himself with the
remaining works and begun skimming them for any hint
of useful information. Now he sat, the work upon his
knee, with a growing certainty about what he must do.
Pug placed the book carefully upon his writing table
and left his study. He walked down the stairs to the hall
that connected all the rooms in use in the academy
building. Work upon the upper level next to the tower
that housed his workrooms had been halted by the rain
that now beat down upon Stardock. A cold gust blew
through a crack in the wall. and Pug gathered his black
robe about himself as he entered the dining hall, which
was used as a common room these days.
Katala looked up from where she ' sat embroidering,
near the fireplace, in one of the comfortable chairs that
occupied the half of the room used as common quarters.
Brother Dominic and Kulgan had been talking, the heavyset
magician puffing on his ever present pipe. Kasumi
watched as William and Gamma played chess in a corner,
their two little faces masks of concentration as they pitted
their newly emerging skills against each other. William
had been an indifferent student of the game until the girl
had shown an interest. Being beaten by her seemed to
bring out his sense of competition, heretofore limited to
the ball yard. Pug thought to himself that, when time
permitted, he would have to explore their gifts more
closely. If time permitted . .. .

Meecham entered, carrying a decanter of winE, and
offered a wine cup to Pug. Pug thanked him and sat
down next to his wife. Katala said, 'Supper is not for
another hour. I had expectEd I would have to come and
fetch you. 'I've finished what work I had and decided to relax a
little before dining. .
Katala said, 'Good. You drive yourself too hard, Pug.
With teaching others, supervising the construction of this
monstrous building, and now locking yourself away in
your study, you have had little time to spend with us.'
Pug smiled at her. 'Nagging?'
"A wifely prerogative,' she said, returning his smile.

Katala was not a nag. Whatever displeasure she felt was
openly voiced, and quickly resolvEd, by either compromise
or one partner's acceptance of the other's
intractability.
Pug looked about. .Where is Gardan?'
Kulgan said, 'Aha, you see. If you hadn't been locked
up in your tower, you'd have remembered he left today
for Shamata, so he can send Lyam messages by military
pouch. He'll be back in a week.'
'He went alone?' Kulgan settled back in his chair. "I cast a foretelling.

The rain will last three days. Many of the workers
returned home for a short visit rather than sit in their
barracks for three days. Gardan went with them. What
have you been delving into in your tower these last few
days? You've barely said a civil word for a week.'
Pug surveyed those in the room with him. Katala
seemed absorbed by her needlework, but he knew she
was listening closely for his answer. The children were
intent upon their game. ' Kulgan and Dominic watched
him with open interest. 'Reading Macros's works, seeking
to discover something that might give a clue to what can
be done. You?'
'Dominic and I have counselled with others in the
village. We've managed to come to some conclusions.'
"Such as?'
"Now that Rogen is healing, and has been able to tell
us in detail what he saw in his vision, some of our more
talented youngsters have thrown themselves upon the
problem.' Pug detected a mixture of amusement and
pride in the older magician's words. 'Whatever it is out
there that seeks to bring harm to the Kingdom, or
Midkemia, is limited in power. Assume for a moment
that it is, as you fear, some dark agency slipped through
the rift from Kelewan, somehow, during the Riftwar. It
has weaknesses, and fears to reveal itself fully.'
"Explain, please,' said Pug, his interest driving aside all
fatigue.
'We will assume this thing is from Kasumi's homeworld
and not seek some other more exotic explanation for its
use of an ancient Tsurani dialect. But unlike Kasumi's
former allies, it comes not in open conquest,' but rather
seeks to use others as tools. Assume it came by the rift
somehow. The rift is a year closed, which means it has
been here for at least that long, and perhaps as long as
eleven years, gathering servants like the Pantathian
priests. Then it seeks to establish itself, by using a
moredhel, the ""beautiful one", as Roger described him,
as an agent. What we need truly fear is the dark presence
behind that beautiful moredhel and the others. That is
the ultimate author of this bloody business.
"Now, if all this is true, it seeks to manipulate and

employ guile rather than direct force. Why? Either it is
too weak to act, and must employ others, or it is biding
its time until it is able to reveal its true nature and come
to"the fore.'
'Which all means we still must discover the identity
and nature of this thing. this power.'
'True. Now, we also have done some speculation predicated
upon the assumption that what we face is not of
Kelewan-" pug innterrupted. 'Do not waste time with that, Kulgan.

We must proceed on the assumption that what we face is
from Kelewan, for that, at least, provides us with a
possible avenue of approach. If Murmandamus is simply
some moredhel witch-king come into his own, one who
just happens to speak a long-dead Tsurani tongue. we
can counter that. But an invasion by some dark power
from Kelewan . . . that is the assumption we must make.'
Kulgan sighed loudly and relit his cold pipe. "I wish we
had more time, and more idea of how to proceed. I
wish we could examine some aspect of this phenomenon
without risk. I wish a hundred things, but most of all I
wish for one work by one reliable witness to this thing.'
'There is a place where such a work may exist.'
Dominic said, 'Where? I would gladly accompany you
or anyone else to such a place, no matter what the risk.'
Kulgan barked a bitter laugh. 'Not likely, good brother.
My former student speaks of a place upon another world.'
Kulgan looked hard at Pug. 'The library of the Assembly.'
Kasumi said, 'The Assembly?'
Pug saw Katala stiffen. "In that place there may be
answers that would aid our coming battle,' he said.
Katala never took her eyes from her work. In controlled
tones she said, "it is good the rift is closed and cannot be
reopened save by chance. Your life may already be
ordered forfeit. Remember that your status as a Great
One was called into question before the attack on the
Emperor. Who can doubt you are now named outlaw?
No, it is good there is no way you might return.'
Pug said, 'There is a way.'
Instantly Katala's eyes were ablaze as she looked hard
at him. 'No, you cannot return.'
Kulgan said, 'How can there be a way back?'
"When I studied for the black robe, I was given a
final task,' Pug explained. "Standing upon the Tower of
Testing. I saw a vision of the time of the Stranger, a
wandering star that imperiled Kelewan. It was Macros
who intervened at the last to save Kelewan. Macros was
again on Kelewan on the day I nearly destroyed the
imperial Arena. It was obvious all the time and only this
week did I understand.'
'Macros could travel between the worlds at will!' said
Kulgan; comprehension dawning in his eyes. 'Macros had
the means to fashion controllable rifts!'
'And I have found it. Clear instructions are in one of
his books.'
Katala whispered, 'You cannot go.'
He reached over and took her white-knuckled hands in
his own. "I must.' He faced Kulgan and Dominic. "I have
the means of returning to the Assembly, and I must use
it. Otherwise, should Murmandamus be a servant of some
dark Kelewanese power, or simply a diversion while such
a power comes into its own, we will be lost without hope.
If we are to find a way of dealing with such a one, we
must first identify it, discover its true nature, and to do
that I must go to Kelewan.' He looked at his wife, then
at Kulgan. "I will return to Tsuranuanni.'

It was Meecham who spoke first."Well then. When do
we leave?'
Pug said, 'We? I must go alone.
The tall franklin said, "You can't go alone,' as if
that .thought was the sheerest absurdity. 'When shall we
leave?'
Pug looked up at Meecham. "You don't speak the
'language. You're too tall to be a Tsurani.'
"I'll be your slave. There are Midkemian slaves there,

you've said often enough.' His tone indicated the argument
was over. He looked from Katala to Kulgan and
said, 'There wouldn't be a moment's peace around here
should anything happen to you.
William came over, Gamina behind him. 'Papa, please

take Meecham with you.'
please.
Pug put his hands in the air. "Very well. We'll establish
some charade.' Kulgan said, "I feel a little better, which is a relative
statement not to be taken as approval.'
'Your objection is duly noted.'
Dominic said, "Now the issue has been broached
I too, wish to again offer to accompany you.'
'You offered before you knew where I was going.
One Midkemian I can look after, two would prove too
burdensome. '
"I have my uses,' replied Dominic. "I know the healer's
arts and can perform my own brands of magic. And I
have a good arm and can wield a mace.'
Pug studied the monk. 'You are taller than I by only a
little. You might pass as a Tsurani, but there's the
problem of language. '
'in Ishap's order we have magic means to learn languages.
While you prepare your rift spells, I can learn the
Tsurani tongue and aid Meecham in learning it as well, if
the Lady Katala or 'Earl Kasumi will help.'
William said, "I can help. I speak Tsurani.
Katala didn't look pleased, but agreed. Kasumi said, "I
also.' He looked troubled.
Kulgan said, 'Of all here, Kasumi, I expected you
would be the most likely to wish a return, yet you've said
nothing.'
'When the last rift closed, my life on Kelewan ended. I
am now Earl of LaMut. My tenure within the Empire of
Tsuranuanni is but a memory. Even if it is possible to
return. I would not, for I have taken oath to the King.
But,' he said to Pug, 'will you carry messages for me to
my father and brother? They have no way to know I live,
let alone prosper.'
"of course. It is only right.' He said to Katala, 'Beloved.
can you fashion two robes of the Order of Hantukama?'
She nodded. He explained to the others, "It is a missionary
order; its members are commonly seen travelling about.
Disguised as such, we shall attract little attention as we
wander. Meecham can be our begging slaVe.'
Kulgan said, "I still don't like this idea. I am not happy.'
Meecham looked at Kulgan. "When you worry, you're
happy.' Pug laughed at this. Katala put her arms around her
husband and held him closely. She also was not happy.

Katala held up the robe and said, "Try this.'
Pug found it a perfect fit. She had carefully chosen
fabrics that would most closely resemble those used upon
Kelewan.
' Pug had been meeting daily with others in the community,
delegating authority for his absence - and, as
was understood but not spoken, against the probability
that he would not return. Dominic had been learning
Tsurani from Kasumi and William and aiding in Mee'cham's
 mastery of that language. Kulgan had been given
Macros's work on rifts to study so he could aid Pug in the
formation of one.
Kulgan entered Pug's private quarters as Katala was
inspecting her handiwork. 'You'll freeze in that.'
Katala said, 'My homeworld is a hot place, Kulgan
These light robes are what is commonly worn.'
'By women as well?' When she said yes. he said
"Positively indecent,' as he pulled out a chair.
William' and Gamina ran into the room. The little girl
was a changed child now that Rogen's recovery was
assured. She was William's constant companion, playing,
competing, and arguing as if she were a sister. Katala had
kept her in the family's quarters while the old man
healed, in a room next to William's.
The boy shouted, 'Meecham's coming.' and broke out
in gleeful laughter as he spun in a circle of delight.
Gamina laughed aloud as well, imitating William's spin,
and Kulgan and Pug exchanged glances, for it was the
first audible sound the child had ever made. Meecham
entered the room, and the adults' laughter joined with
the children's. The burly forester's hairy legs and arms
stuck out from the short robe, and he stood awkwardly in
the imitation Tsurani sandals. He looked around the room. 'So what's funny?'

Kulgan said, 'i've grown so used to seeing you in
hunter's togs, I couldn't imagine what you'd look like.'
Pug said, 'You just look a little different than I had
expected,' and tried to stifle a laugh.
The franklin shook his head in disgust. 'if you're done?
When do we leave?' Pug said, 'Tomorrow morning, just after dawn.
Instantly all laughter in the room died.

They waited quietly around the hill with the large tree,
on the north side of Stardock island. The rain had
stopped, but a damp, cold wind blew, promising more
rain shortly. most of the community had come to see
Pug, Dominic, and Meecham on their way. Katala stood
next to Kulgan with her hands upon William's shoulders.
Gamina clutched tightly to Katala's skirt, looking nervous
and a little frightened.
Pug stood alone, consulting the scroll he had fashioned.
A short way off, Meecham and Dominic waited, shivering
against the cold, while they listened to Kasumi speak. He
was intensively speaking of every detail of Tsurani custom
and life he could remember that might prove important.
He was constantly remembering details he had almost
forgotten. The franklin held the 'travel bag Pug had
prepared, containing the usual items a priest would carry.
Also inside. under those items, were a few things uncommon
to a priest on Kelewan, weapons and coins of metal,
a fortune by Kelewanese standards.
Kulgan came to where Pug indicated, holding a staff
fashioned by a woodcarver in the village. He planted it
firmly in the soil, then took another handed to him and
placed it four feet away. He stepped back as Pug began
to read aloud from the scroll.
Between the staves a field of light grew, rainbow
colours dancing up and down. A crackling noise could be
heard, and the air began to smell as it did after a lightning
strike, acrid and pungent.
The light began to expand and change in colour,
moving faster through the spectrum until it gleamed
whitely. It grew in 'intensity until it was too bright to look
upon. Still Pug's voice droned on. Then came a loud
explosion of noise, as if a thunderclap had pealed between
the staves, and a short gust of wind towards the gap
between them, as if a sudden drawing in of air had
occurred.
Pug put away his scroll and all looked at what he had
fashioned. A shimmering square of grey 'nothingness'
stood between the upright staves. Pug motioned to
Dominic and said, 'i'll go through first. The rift is targeted
to a glade behind my old estate, but it might have
appeared elsewhere.'
If the environment proved hostile, he would have to
step around the pole. entering it from the same side
again, appearing back on Midkemia as if he had passed
through a hoop. If he was able.
He turned and smiled at Katala and William. His son
jiggled around nervously, but Katala's reassuring pressure
on the boy's shoulders quieted him. She only nodded,
her face composed. Pug stepped into the rift and vanished. There was an
audible intake of breath at the sight, for only a few there
knew what to expect. The following moments dragged
on, and many unconsciously held their breath.
Suddenly Pug appeared from the other side of the rift
and an audible sigh of relief came from those who waited.
He came back to the others and said, it opens exactly
where I had hoped it would. Macros's spellcraft was
flawless.' He took Katala's hands. "It is next to the
reflecting pool in the meditation glade.'
Katala fought back the tears. She had tended flowers
around that pool, where a solitary bench looked over
calm waters, when she had been mistress of that great
estate. She nodded understanding, and Pug embraced
her, then William. As Pug knelt before William, Gamina
suddenly threw her arms around his neck. Be careful.
He hugged her in return. "I will, little one.'
Pug motioned Dominic and Meecham to follow and
walked through the rift. They hesitated the barest instant
and followed him into the greyness.
The others stood watching for long minutes after the
three had vanished, and the rain began again. No one
wished to leave. Finally, as the rain took on a more
insistent quality, Kulgan said, 'Those set to watch,
remain. The rest, back to work.' everyone slowly moved
off, no one resenting Kulgan's sharp tone. They all shared
his concern.

Yagu, chief gardener on the estate of Netoha, near the
city of Ontoset, turned to find three strangers walking the
path from the meditation glade to the great house.
Two were priests of Hantukama, the Bringer of Blessed
Health, though both were unusually tall for priests.
Behind walked their begging slave, a captive barbarian
giant from the last war. Yagu shuddered, for he was an
ugly sort, with a horrible scar down his left cheek. In a
culture of warriors; Yagu was a gentle man, preferring
the company of his flowers and plants to that of men' who
spoke only of warfare and honour. Still, he had a duty to
his master's house and approached the three strangers.
When they saw him coming, they halted, and Yagu
bowed first, as he was initiating the conversation common
courtesy until rank was established. 'Greetings,
honoured priests. It is Yagu the gardener who presumes
to interrupt your journey.'
Pug and Dominic bowed. Meecham waited to the rear,
ignored, as was the custom. Pug said, "Greetings, Yagu.
For two humble priests of Hantukama your presence is
no interruption. Are you well?'
Yagu said, 'Yes, I am well,' finishing off the formal
greeting of strangers. Then he took on a lofty stance,
crossing his arms and sticking his chest out. 'What brings
the priests of Hantukama to the house of my master?'
Pug said, 'We travel from Scran to the City of the
Plains. As we passed by, we saw this estate and 'hoped to
beg a meal for poor missionaries. Is this possible?' Pug
knew it was not Yagu's prerogative to say, but he let the
scrawny gardener play out the role of deciding.
The gardener stroked his chin for a moment. 'it is
permitted for you to beg, though I cannot say if you will
be turned away or fed. Come, I will show you the
kichen.'
As they walked' towards the house, Pug said, "May I
inquire who lives in this wondrous abode?'
' Showing pride in the reflected glory of his master,
Yagu said, 'This is the house of Netoha, called "He Who
rises Qu'ickly".'
Pug feigned ignorance, though he was pleased to know
his former servant was still in possession of the estate.
"Perhaps,' said Pug, 'it would not be too offensive for
humble priests to pay respects to so august a personage.'
Yagu frowned. His master was a busy man, but he also
made time for such as these. He would not be pleased to
find the gardener had presumed to fend them off, though
they were little more than beggars, not being from a
powerful sect, such as the servants of Chochocan or
Juran. "I will ask. It may be my master will have a
moment for you. If not, then perhaps a meal may be
had.'
The gardener led them to a door Pug knew led into the
kitchen area. The afternoon sun beat down upon them as
the gardener disappeared inside. The house was a strange
design of interconnecting buildings Pug had built nearly
two years before. It had started something of a revolution
in Tsurani architecture, but Pug doubted the trend had
continued, given the Tsurani sensitivity to political
fortune.
The door slid open and a woman stepped out, followed
by Yagu. Pug bowed before she could get a look at his
face. It was Almorella, a former slave Pug had freed.
now wed to Netoha. She had been Katala's closest friend.
Yagu said, 'My mistress graciously agrees to speak with
the priests of Hantukama.'
From his bowing position Pug said, 'Are you well
mistress?'

Hearing his voice, Almorella gripped the doorframe as
she fought for breath. When Pug straightened, she forced
herself to breathe and said, "I . . . am well.' Her eyes
widened and she began to speak his Tsurani name.
Pug shook his head. "I have met your honoured husband.
I hoped he might spare a moment for an old
acquaintance . '
Almost inaudibly Almorella said, 'My husband always
has time for . . . old friends.'
She bade them enter and closed the door behind. Yagu
stood outside a moment, perplexed at his mistress'S
behaviour. But as the door slid shut, he shrugged and
returned to his beloved plants. Who could understand
the rich?

Almorella led them quickly and silently through the
kitchen. She struggled to maintain her composure, barely
concealing her shaking hands as she brushed past three
startled slaves. They never noticed their mistress's agitated
state, for their eyes were riveted on Meecham, the
biggest barbarian slave they had ever seen, truly a giant
among giants.
Reaching Pug's former workroom, she slid aside the
door and whispered, "I will get my husband.'
They entered and sat, Meecham awkwardly, upon
plump cushions on the floor. Pug looked about the room
and saw that little had changed. He felt a strange sense of
being in two places at the same time', for he could almost
imagine opening the door to find Katala and William
outside in the garden. But he wore the saffron-coloured
robe of a priest of Hantukama, not the black of a. Great
One, and a terrible peril was possibly about to descend
upon the two worlds with which his fate seemed forever
intertwined. Since beginning the search for a return to
Kelewan, a faint nagging had started at the back of Pug's
mind. He sensed that his unconscious mind was operating
as it often did, working on a problem while his attention
was elsewhere. Something about all that had occurred on
Midkemia had a faintly familiar quality to it, and he
knew the time was soon coming when he would intuit
what that quality was.
The door slid open and a man entered, Almorella
behind. She closed the door, while the man bowed low.
'You honour my home, Great One.'
'Honours to your house, Netoha. Are you well?'
"I am well, Great One. How may I serve?'
'Sit, and tell me of the Empire.' Without hesitation
Netoha sat. 'Does Ichindar still rule the Holy City?'
'The Light of Heaven still rules the Empire.'
'What of the Warlord?'
"Almecho, he you knew as Warlord, acted with honour
and took his own life after you shamed him at the
imperial Games. His nephew, Axantucar, wears the white
and gold. He is of the Oaxatucan Family, one who gained
by the death of others when . . . the peace was betrayed.
All with stronger claims were killed, and many with
claims as valid as his to the office ' of Warlord were . . .
dealt with. The War Party is still firmly in control of the
High Council.'
Pug considered. With the War Party still in control of
the nations, there would be scant chance of finding
sympathetic ears in the High Council, though the Game
of the Council would continue. That terrible, seemingly
never-ending struggle for power might provide the opportunity
for discovering alliance.
"What of the Assembly?'
"I sent those things which you instructed, Great One
The others were burned as you commanded. I received
only a note of thanks from the Great One Hochopepa
nothing more.'
"What is the talk in the market?'
"I have not heard your name mentioned in many
months. But just after you departed, it was said you
attempted to lure the Light of Heaven into a trap
bringing dishonour on yourself. You have been named
outlaw and outcast by the Assembly, the first to have the
black robe stripped away. Your words are no longer as
law. Any who aid you do so at peril of their lives, and the
lives of their families, and the lives of their clan.'
Pug rose, 'We shall not tarry here, old friend. I would
not risk your lives, nor the lives of your clan.'
Netoha spoke as he moved to open the door. "I know
you better than most. You would not do what they
accused you of, Great One.'
'Great One no longer. by edict of the Assembly.'
'Then I honour the man, Milamber,' he said, using
Pug's Tsurani name. 'You have given us much. The name
Netoha of the Chichimecha is upon the rolls of the
Hunzan Clan. My sons will grow in greatness because of
your generosity.'
Sons?'
Almorella patted her stomach. 'Next planting season .
The healer priests think twins.'
'Katala will be doubly pleased. First, to know the sister
of her heart is well, and second, that you will be a
mother.'
Almorella's eyes brimmed with moisture."Katala is
well? And the boy?'
"My wife and son are well and send you their love.
"Return with our greetings and affection, Milamber. I
have prayed that someday we may again meet."
'Perhaps we shall. Not soon, but someday . . . Netoha,
' is the pattern intact?'
'it is, Milamber. Little has changed. This is still your
home. '
Pug rose and motioned for the others to follow him. "I
may have need of it for a quick return to my own lands.
If I sound the arrival gong twice, have everyone quit the
house at once, for there may be others behind me who
will harm you. I hope it will not be so.'
"Your will, Milamber.'
They walked out of the room and made for the pattern
room. Pug said, "In the glade by the pool is the means for
my return home. I would it remained undisturbed until I
close it.'
'it is done. I will instruct the grounds keepers to allow
no-one in the glade.'
At the door Almorella said, 'Where are you bound,
Milamber?'
'That I will not tell you, for what you do not know
cannot be forced from you. You are already in jeopardy
for simply having me under your roof. I will add no
more. ' Without further word he led Dominic and Meecham
into the pattern room and closed the door behind.
Removing a scroll from his belt pouch, Pug placed it on
the centre of a large tile pattern, a depiction of three
dolphins. It was sealed with black wax, embossed with a
large chop, from the ring of the Great One. "I send a
message to a friend. With this symbol upon it, no one
will dare touch it but him to whom it is addressed.' He
closed his eyes for a moment, then suddenly the scroll
wasn't there. Pug motioned Dominic and Meecham to stand next to
him on the pattern. 'Every Great One in the Empire has
a pattern in his home. Each is unique, and when it is
remembered exactly, a magician can transport himself or
send an object to it. In a few cases, a location that is very
familiar, such as the kitchen at Crydee where I worked as
a boy, might serve as well as a pattern. It is usual to will a
gong to sound, announcing our arrival, though I shall
avoid that this time, I think. Come.' He reached out and
gripped each of them, closed his eyes. and incanted.
There seemed to be a sudden blur and the room appeared
to change about them. Dominic said, 'What . . .?' then realized they had
transported to another place. He looked down at a
different pattern, resembling an ornamental flower of red
and yellow. Pug said, 'The one' who lives here is brother to one of
my old teachers, for whom the pattern was emplaced.
That Great One called here often. I hope we may still
find friends here.'
Pug went to the door and slid it slightly ajar. He peered
up and down the corridor. Dominic stepped up behind
him. 'How far did we travel?'
'Eight hundred miles and more.
'Amazing,' Dominic said softly.
Pug led them swiftly to another room, where the
afternoon sunlight could be seen coming through a
window, casting the shadow of the room's lone occupant
upon the door. Without announcing himself, Pug slid it
open.
 Before a writing desk sat an old man, his once powerful
body shrunken by age. He squinted at the parchment
before him, and his lips moved silently as he read. His
'robe was a deep blue, simple, but finely made. Pug was
shocked, for he remembered this man as a tower despite
his advancing years. The last year had taken a toll.
The ' man , looked up at the intruders. His eyes grew
large as he said, 'Milamber!'
Pug motioned his companions through the door and
slid it behind. 'Honours to your house, Lord of the
Shinzawai. '
Kamatsu, Lord of the Shinzawai did not rise in greeting.
He stared at the former slave who had risen to the
rank of great One and said, 'You are under edict,
branded traitor. and without honour. Your life is forfeit
should you be found.' His tone was cold, his expression
hostile.
Pug was taken aback. Of all his allies in the plot to end
the Riftwar, Kamatsu had been among the staunchest.
,Kasumi, his son, had carried the Emperor's message of
peace to King Rodric.
'Have I caused your offence, Kamatsu?' Pug asked.
"I had a son among those lost when you attempted to
entrap the Light of Heaven with your deceit.'
'Your son still lives, Kamatsu. He honours his father
and sends affection.' Pug handed Kamatsu the message
from Kasumi. The old man peered at it for a long time,
reading every character slowly. When he had finished,
tears ran unashamedly down his leathery cheeks. 'Can all
this be true?' he said.
'it is true. My King had nothing to do with the
deception at the truce table. Nor had I a hand in it. That
mystery is long in explaining, but first hear of your son.
He not only is alive, but is now counted highly in my
nation. Our King sought no vengeance upon our former
enemies. He granted freedom to all who would serve
him. Kasumi and the others are freemen in his army.'
'All?' said Kamatsu incredulously.
'Four thousand men of Kelewan are now soldiers of
my King's army. They are counted among the most loyal
of his subjects. They bring honour to their families. When
King Lyam's life was in danger, the task of guaranteeing
his safety was given to your son and his men.' Pride
shone in Kamatsu's eyes. "The Tsurani live in a city called
LaMut, and fight well against the enemies of our nation.
Your son is named Earl of that city, as important a rank
as Lord of a family, closer to clan Warchief. He is married
to Megan, the daughter of a powerful merchant of Rillanon,
and someday you will be a grandfather.'
The old man seemed to gain in strength, he said, 'Tell
me of his life.' Pug and Kamatsu began to speak of
Kasumi, his life for the last year, and his rise, his meeting
Megan just before Lyam's coronation, and their rapid
courtship and marriage. For nearly a half hour they
spoke, the urgency of Pug's mission forgotten for the
moment.
When they were done, Pug said, 'And Hokanu?.
Kasumi asked after his brother.'
'My younger son is well. He patrols the northern
frontier against the Thun raiders.'
'Then the Shinzawai rise to greatness on two worlds.'
said Pug. 'Alone among Tsurani families can the Shinzawai
make that claim.'
Kamatsu said, 'That is a strange thing to contemplate.'
His voice turned serious. 'What has caused your return,
Milamber? It is not only to ease an old man's loss, I am
certain.'
Pug introduced his companions and then said. 'A dark
power rises up against my nation, Kamatsu. We have
faced only a part of its might and we seek to understand
its nature.'
Kamatsu said, 'What has this to do with your return
here? What cause have you to return?'
'in a vision, one of our seers confronted this dark
agency and was addressed in the ancient temple language.'
He spoke of Murmandamus and the dark power
behind the moredhel.
'How can this be?'
'That is what has caused me to risk a return. I hope to
find an answer in the library of the Assembly.'
Kamatsu shook his head. 'You risk much. There is a
certain tension within the High Council, beyond what is
usual for the Great Game. I suspect we are on the verge
of some major upheaval, as this new Warlord seems even
more obsessed with controlling the nations than was his
uncle.'
Understanding at once the Tsurani subtlety, Pug asked,
'Do you speak of a final schism between Warlord and
Emperor?'
With a heavy sigh, the old man nodded. "I fear civil
war. Should Ichindar press forward with the certainty he
showed to end the Riftwar, Axantucar would be blown
away as chaff upon the wind, for the majority of the clans
and families still hold the Emperor as supreme, and few
trust this new Warlord. But the Emperor has lost much
face. For him to have forced the five great clans to the
peace table only to be betrayed has robbed him of
his moral authority. Axantucar is free to act without
opposition. I think this Warlord seeks to unite the two
offices. The gold trim on white is not enough for this one.
I think he seeks to wear the gold of the Light of Heaven.'
"'in the Game of the Council, anything is possible,"'
quoted Pug. 'But look you, all were betrayed at the peace
talks.' He spoke of the last message of Macros the
Black, reminding Kamatsu of the ancient teachings of
the Enemy's attacks upon the nation, and speaking of
Macros's fear that the rift would draw that terrible power.
'Such duplicity shows that the Emperor was no more a
fool than the rest, but it still does not forgive him the
mistake. Yet such a tale may win him a little more
support in the High Council - if support has any meaning. '
'You think the Warlord ready to act?'
'Anytime now. He has neutralized the Assembly by
having his own pet magicians call its own autonomy into
question. Great Ones sit in debate over their own fate.
Hochopepa and my brother, Fumita, dare not take a
hand in the Great Game at this time. Politically, the
Assembly might as well not exist.'
'Then seek allies in the High Council. Tell them this:
somehow our two worlds stand linked again by some dark
power of Tsurani origin. It moves against the Kingdom. It
is power beyond human understanding, perhaps power to
challenge the gods themselves. I cannot tell you how I
know, but i feel certain that, should the Kingdom fall,
then will Midkemia fall, should Midkemia fall, then surely
will Kelewan fall after.'
Kamatsu, Lord of the Shinzawai, former Warchief of
the Kanazawai Clan, showed an expression of concern.
Softly he said, 'Can it be?'
Pug's expression showed he believed it true. 'it may be
I will be captured or killed. If so, I must have allies on
the High Council who will speak this cause to the Light
of Heaven. It is not my life I fear for, Kamatsu, but the
lives of two worlds. If I fail, the Great Ones Hochopepa
or Shimone must return to my world with whatever can
be learned of this dark power. Will you help?'
Kamatsu rose. 'Of course. Even had you not brought
word of Kasumi, even had our doubts about you been
true, only a madman would be unwilling to put aside
former grievances in light of such warning. I 'will leave at
once by fast boat downriver to the Holy City. Where will
you be?'
'Seeking help from another. If I am successful, I shall
plead my case before the Assembly. No one gains the
black robe without having learned to listen before acting.
No, my true risk is falling into the Warlord's hands. If
you do not hear of me in three days, assume that has
come to pass. I will be either dead or captive. Then you
must take action. Only silence will aid this Murmandamus.
In this you must not fail.'
"I will not fail, Milamber.'
Pug, once known as Milamber, greatest of the Great
Ones of Tsuranuanni, rose and bowed. 'We must leave.
Honours to your house, Lord of the Shinzawai.'
Kamatsu bowed lower' than was required of his station
and said, 'Honours to your house, Great One.'

Hawkers shouted to passing buyers as the sun beat down.
The market square at Ontoset was athrong with business.
Pug and his companions had taken a place in the section
of the plaza set aside for licensed beggars and priests. For
three mornings they rose from under the protective wall
of the square and spent the day preaching to those willing
to stop and listen. Meecham would pass among the small
crowds, holding out the beggar's bowl. There was only
one temple of Hantukama east of the Holy City of
Kentosani - in the city of Yankora. far from Ontoset - so
there was little risk of them being discovered by another
wandering priest in the short time they would be staying
in the city. The order was widely and thinly spread, and
many who served had not seen another priest of the
order for years.
Pug finished his sermon for the morning and returned
to Dominic's side as the monk instructed an injured girl's
mother in proper care for the child. Her broken leg
would be fully mended within days. The woman's grateful
thanks were all she could give, but Dominic's smile
indicated that was sufficient. Meecham joined them,
showing several of the tiny gemstones and slivers of metal
that served as currency in the Empire. "A man could
make a decent living this way.'
Pug said, 'You scared them into giving.'
A commotion in the crowd made them all look as a
company of horsemen rode past. They wore the green
armour of a house known to Pug by reputation, the
Hoxaka. They were members of the War Party. Meecham
said, 'They've taken to riding, for certain.'
'Like the Tsurani in LaMut,' Pug whispered back. 'it
seems once a Tsurani gets over being terrified of horses,
he becomes mad for them. I know Kasumi did. Once
upon a horse, it was near-impossible to get him off.' It
appeared the horse had become accepted in the Empire
and cavalry firmly established in the arsenal of Tsurani
weapons.
When the horses had passed, another noise made them
turn. standing before them was a heavyset man in black
robes, his bald head gleaming in the noonday sun. On
every side citizens were bowing and moving away, not
wishing to crowd the august presence of a Great One of
the Empire. Pug and his companions bowed.
The magician said, 'You three' will come with me.'
Pug made a show of stammering, 'Your will. Great
One.' They hurried to follow after.
The black-robed magician walked directly to the nearest
building, a leatherworker's establishment. The
magician entered and said to the proprietor, "I have need
of this building. You may return in an hour.'
Without hesitation the owner said, 'Your will, Great
One,' and called for his apprentices to join him outside.
In a minute the building was empty except for Pug and
his friends.
Pug and Hochopepa embraced. then the stout magician
said, 'Milamber, you are mad to return. When I received
your message, I could scarcely believe my senses. Why
did you risk sending it through the pattern, and why this
meeting in the heart of the city?'
'Pug said, 'Meecham, watch the window.' To Hochopepa
he said, 'What better place to hide than in plain
sight? You receive messages by the pattern often, and
who would think of questioning you about speaking to
common priests?' He turned and said, 'These are my
companions,' and made the introductions.
Hochopepa swept clear a bench and sat. "I have a
thousand questions. How did you manage to return? The magicians who serve
the Warlord have been trying to
relocate your homeworld, for the Light of Heaven, may
the gods protect him, is determined to avenge the betrayal
of the peace conference. And how did you manage to
destroy the first rift? And live?' He saw Pug's amusement
at his flood of questions and ended, "But most important,
why have you returned?'
Pug said, 'There is loose upon my homeworld some
dark power of Tsurani origin, an evil thing of dark magic.
I seek knowledge, for it is of Kelewan.' Hochopepa
looked questioningly at him. "Many strange things occur
on' my world, and it is the most elegant answer, Hocho. I
hope to discover some clue to the nature of this dark
power. And it is a fearful agency.' He went into detail
about what had occurred since the first. from explaining
the reason for the betrayal, to the attempts on Prince
Arutha. to his own interpretation of Rogenr's seeing.
Hochopepa said, 'This is strange, for we know of no
such power upon kelewan - at least , none I have heard
about. One advantage to our organization is that two
thousand years of cooperative effort by the Black Robes
has rid this world of a great many such menaces. In our
lore we know of demon lords and witch-kings, spirits of
dark powers and things of evil, all of whom fell before
the combined might of the assembly.'
From the window Meecham said, 'Seems you might
have missed one.'
Hochopepa appeared taken aback at being addressed
by a commoner, then he chuckled. 'Perhaps, or perhaps
there is another explanation. I do not know. But,' he said
to Pug, 'you have always been a force for social good
within the Empire, and I have no doubt that all you have
said is truth. I will act as your agent, seeking safe passage
to the library, and I will aid in your research. But
understand, the Assembly is hamstrung by internal politics.
The vote to let you live is by no means a certainty. I
shall have to return and lobby. It may take days before I
can openly voice the question.
'But I think I can succeed at this. You raise too many
questions to ignore. I will convene a meeting as soon as
possible and return for you once I have pleaded your
case. Only a madman would fail to heed your warning
even should it prove to be something not of this world
that plagues your land. At worst you gain a parole to use
the library and depart, at best, perhaps a reinstatement.
You will have to justify your past actions.'
"I can and will. Hocho.'
Hochopepa left the bench and stood before his old
friend. 'it may be we can yet have peace between our
nations, Milamber. Should the old wound somehow be
healed. we could benefit both worlds. I, for one, would
love to visit this academy you build and meet this seer
who predicts the future and this child who speaks with
the mind.'
"I have many things I would share, Hocho. The making
of controllable rifts is but a tenth part of it. But all that
later. Go now.'
Pug began to guide Hochopepa to the door, but something
in Meecham's pose caught his eye. It was too still
and awkward. Dominic had been closely following the
magicians' conversation and had not seemed to notice
any change in the franklin. Pug studied Meecham a
second, then shouted, 'A spell!'
Pug moved towards the window and touched Meecham.
The tall man was unable to move. Past him Pug could see
men running towards the building. Before Pug could
react and incant a spell of protection, the door exploded
inwards with a thunderous sound, knocking everyone
inside to the floor and stunning them momentarily.
Senses reeling, Pug tried to regain his feet, but his ears
rang from the sound and his vision blurred. As he
staggered upright, an object was hurled in through the
door. It was a ball-like object the size of a man's fist. Pug
again tried to establish a spell of protection around the
room, but the sphere emitted a blinding orange light.
Pug's eyes felt seared and he closed them, breaking the
pattern of his spell. He began again, but the object made
a high-pitched whine, which seemed somehow to drain
away his strength. He heard someone hit the floor and
couldn't tell if Hochopepa or Dominic had tried to rise
'and failed or if Meecham had toppled. Pug fought against
the magic of the sphere with all his considerable might,
but he was off balance and confused. He staggered to the
door, trying to get away from the object, for once free of
its debilitating effects he could easily save his friends. But
the unknown spell was too quick and strong. At the threshold
of the shop he collapsed. He fell to his knees, blinking
to clear the double vision the sphere or explosion had
inflicted upon him. He could make out men approaching
the building from across the plaza. They wore the armour
of the Warlord's Imperial Whites, his personal honour
guard. Sinking downwards into darkness, Pug could see
that the one who led them wore a black robe. Pug could
hear the magician's voice, as if coming from a vast
distance through the ringing in his ears, saying, 'Bind
them.'

16

Moraelin

Mist blew through the canyon.
Arutha signalled a halt, Jimmy peered downwards
through the blowing moisture. A waterfall thundered
beside the trail that was their route towards Moraelin.
Now they were properly in the Great Northern Mountains,
in that area between the elver forests and the
Northlands. Moraelin lay higher in the mountains, in a
rocky, barren place just below the crest. They waited
while Martin scouted the pass ahead. Since leaving their
elver guides they had become a military mission in
enemy-held lands. They could trust Arutha's talisman to
hide them from Murmandamus's scrying magic, but that
he knew they would soon come to Moraelin was beyond
question. It was never to be a question of if they would
encounter his minions, but simply when.
Martin returned, signalling that the way ahead was
clear, then he put up his hand for a halt again. He dashed
past the others, heading back down the trail. As he
passed Baru and Roald, he motioned for them to follow.
They jumped down from their mounts, and Laurie and
Jimmy took the reins. Arutha looked back. wondering
what Martin had seen, while Jimmy kept eyes ahead.
Martin and the others returned, another figure walking
 with them. Arutha relaxed when he saw it was the
elf Galain.
The oppressive nature of their journey was such that
when they spoke, it was in hushed tones, lest echoes in
the hills betray them. Arutha greeted the elf. "We thought
you not coming.'
Galain replied, "The Warleader sent me after you with
this intelligence but a few hours after you departed.
After he was found, the gwali Apalla said two things of
importance. First, a beast of some ferocious nature
unclear from the gwali's description inhabits the area
near the lake. Tomas pleads caution. Second, there is
another entrance to Moraelin. He felt it of sufficient
import to dispatch me after.' Galain smiled. "Besides, I
thought it might also prove useful to see if you were
being followed.'
'Were we?'
Galain nodded. "Two moredhel scouts cut your trail
less than a mile north of our forests. They were marking
'your way, and one surely would have run ahead to warn
when you got close to Moraelin. I would have joined you
earlier, but I needed to be certain neither could escape to
give warning. Now there is no such risk.' Martin nodded,
knowing the elf would have killed them both suddenly
and without chance for alarm. 'There are no signs of
others.'
Martin asked, 'Do you return?'
'Tomas gave me discretion. It is not of much use to go
back at this point. I may as well travel with you. I may
not pass over the Tracks of the Hopeless, but until that
portal is reached, another bow may prove useful.'
'Welcome, ' said Arutha.
Martin mounted and, without words, Galain ran on
ahead to scout the way. They moved gradually upwards, the
falls chilling them despite the early summer warmth.
At these heights hail and occasionally snow were not
uncommon except in the hottest months of summer, still
weeks away. The nights had been damp, though not as
bitter as had been feared, for they made cold camp. The
elves had given them trail rations, dried meat and hard
cakes of nut flour and dried fruit - nourishing but cheerless
fare.

The trail led along the face of the cliffs, until it came

out in a high meadow, overlooking the valley. A silver,
sparkling lake lapped its shores gently in the late afternoon
light, the only sound being the singing of birds and
the rustling of the wind in the trees. Jimmy looked about,
'How can . . . how can the day be so nice when we move
towards nothing but trouble?'
Roald said, "One thing about soldiering: if you're going
to risk dying, there's no sense doing it wet, cold, and
hungry unless absolutely necessary. Enjoy the sunshine,
lad. It's a'gift.'

They watered their horses. After a welcome rest, they
continued onwards. The path Calin had spoken about,
north of the lake, was easily found but steep and difficult
to negotiate. As sunset approached, Galain returned with news of a
promising cave in which they might safely build a small
fire. "It is curved, twice, and the air moves upwards
through fissures that will carry smoke away. Martin, if we
leave now, we might have time to hunt game near the
lak~."
Arutha said,, "Don't be overly long in the hunt. Signal
your approach with that raven's honk you do so well, or
you'll be greeted by some sword points.'
Martin nodded once, giving the reins of his horse to
Jimmy. He said,
"Two hours after sunset at the latest,

And he and Galane were heading back down the trail
towards the lake.

Roald and Baru took point, and after a five-minute
ride found the cave Galain had mentioned. It was flat,
wide, and free of other occupants. Jimmy explored back
and found it narrow after a hundred feet, so that unexpected
visitors would have to come through the mouth.
Laurie and Baru gathered wood and the first fire in days
was built, though it was a small one. Jimmy and Arutha
settled in with the others, waiting for Martin and Galain.

Martin and Galain lay in wait. They had constructed a
natural-looking blind, using brush gathered from other
parts of the woods. They were certain they could observe
any animal coming down to the lake's edge without being
seen. They had lain downwind from the lake, neither
moving, for half an hour when the sound of hooves
on the rocks sounded from below the cliff.
, Both nocked arrows, but otherwise remained silent.
Into the meadow from the trail below rode a dozen
men, dressed in black. Each wore the strange dragon
armour seen at Sarth, and their heads moved constantly, as
if they looked for something - or someone. Then behind
them came Murad, his cheek still showing the additional
scar arutha had given him on the road to Sarth.
the black Slayers reined in and watered their mounts,
in the saddle. Murad seemed relaxed but alert.
for ten minutes they let the horses drink. When
they were finished watering their horses, they
rode out, turning up the trail after Arutha's band.
When they were out of sight, Martin said, "They must
come in between Yabon and Stone Mountain to
avoid your forests. Tathar is correct in his assumption
that they will move to Moraelin to wait for us.'
Galane said, "Few things in life disturb me, Martin, but
those black Slayers are one.'
"You're just now coming to that conclusion?'
"You humans are given to overreaction upon occasion."
Galain looked to where the riders had gone.
Martin said, 'They will overtake Arutha and the others
shortly. If this Murad can track, then they will find the
cave . '
Galain stood. 'Let us hope the Hadati knows his trail
craft. If not, at least we will be attacking from the rear.'
Martin smiled a grim smile. 'That will certainly be of
comfort to those in the cave. Thirteen against five, and
only one way in or out.'
Without further comment, they shouldered their bows
and began to lope up the trail behind the moredhel.

'Riders come,' said Baru. Jimmy was instantly covering
the fire with dirt, carried in against the need. That way
the fire would die quickly without smoke. Then Laurie
touched Jimmy on the arm and motioned that he should
come to the rear of the cave to help quiet the horses.
Roald, Baru, and Arutha moved forward to where they
could, they hoped, see out of the cave mouth without
being seen.
The evening looked murky dark after the bright fire,
but soon their eyes adjusted and they could see the riders
passing by the cave. The rearmost pulled up a moment
before the others answered some silent command and '
halted. He looked about, as if sensing something nearby.
Arutha fingered his talisman, hoping the moredhel was
simply cautious and not feeling his presence.
A cloud passed from before the little moon, the only
one up this early, and the vista before the cave became
slightly more illuminated. Baru stiffened at sight of
Murad, for the hillman could now clearly see the moredhel.
He had begun to draw his sword when Arutha's
hand gripped his wrist. The Prince hissed in the hillman's
ear, "Not yet!'
Baru's body trembled as he struggled against his desire
to avenge his family's death and complete his Bloodquest.
He burned to attack the moredhel without regard for his
own safety, but there were his companions to consider.
Then Roald gripped the back of the Hadati's neck and
put his cheek against Baru's, so he could speak into his
ear almost without sound. 'if the twelve in black cut you
down before you reach Murad, what honour do you to
'your village's memory?'
Baru'ss sword slipped noiselessly back into its sheath.
Silently they watched as Murad surveyed the surroundings.
His eyes fell on the mouth of the cave. He peered at
the entrance, and for a moment Arutha could feel the
scar-faced moredhel's eyes upon him. Then they were
moving again . . . then they were gone.
Arutha crept forward until he hung out of the cave,
watching for signs the riders were returning. Suddenly a
voice behind said, "I thought a cave bear might have run
you all out of there.'
Arutha spun, his heart racing and his sword coming
out of its scabbard, to find Martin and Galain standing
behind. He put up his weapon and said, "I could have run
you through. '
the others appeared and Galain said, "They should
have investigated, but they seemed determined to be
somewhere in a hurry. So we might do well to follow. I'll
keep them under watch and mark the trail.'
, Arutha said, 'What if another band of Dark Brothers
comes along? Won't they find your trail markings?'
Only Martin will recognize my trail markings.
No southern Moredhel can track like an elf. He shouldered
his bow and began to run after the riders.
As' he vanished into the night's gloom, Laurie said,
"and if the Dark Brothers are forest dwellers?'
Galain's voice came back out of the dark: "I'll have
about as much to worry about as you will.'
After Galain was out of earshot, Martin said, "I wish
he were only joking.'

Galain ran back down the trail , motioning towards a
stand of trees off to the left of the road. They hurried to
the trees and dismounted. They led the mounts down
into a draw, as deep into the woods as possible. Galain
whispered, "A patrol comes.' He, Martin, and Arutha
hurried back to the edge of the trees where they could
spy anyone on the trail.
A few minutes passed with agonizing slowness; then a
dozen riders came down the mountain road, a mixed
band of moredhel and men. The moredhel were wearing
cloaks and were clearly forest dwellers from the south.
They rode past without pause, and when they were out of
sight, Martin said, 'Renegades now flock to Murmandamus's
 banner.' He almost spat as he said, "There are few
 I'd gladly kill, but humans who would serve the moredhel
for gold are among them.'
As they returned to the others, Galain said to Arutha,
'There is a camp athwart the road a mile above here.
They are clever, for it is a difficult passage around the
camp, and we would need to leave your horses here. It is
that or ride through the camp.'
'How far to the lake is it?' asked the Prince.
'Only a few miles. But once past the camp we rise
above the tree line and there is little cover, save down
among the rocks. It will be a slow passage, and better
done at night. There are 'bound to be scouts around and
many guards on the road to the bridge.'
'What about the second entrance the gwali told of?'
"If we understood rightly, by descending down into the

Tracks of the Hopeless, you'll find a cave or fissure that
will lead through the rock up to the surface of the plateau
near the lake.'
Arutha considered. "Let us leave our mounts here.'
Laurie said, with a faint smile, 'Might as well tether
the horses to the trees. If we die, we won't need them.'
Roald said, 'My old captain used to get downright
short with soldiers who harped on death before a battle.'
'Enough!' said Arutha. He took a step away, then
turned. 'i've been worrying this over and over. I've come
this far and I'll continue, but . . . you may leave now if
you wish, and I'll not object.' He looked at Laurie and
Jimmy, then Baru and Roald. He was answered by
silence.
Arutha looked from face to face, then nodded
brusquely. "Very well. Tie up the horses and lighten your
packs; We walk.'
The moredhel watched the trail below, well lit by large
and middle moons, as little moon rose. He perched atop
an outcropping of rock, nestled behind a boulder. He
was positioned so he would be unobserved by any coming
up the trail.
Martin and Galain took aim at the moredhel's back as
Jimmy slipped behind the rocks. They would try to win
past without being seen, but if the moredhel twitched in
the wrong direction, Martin and Galain meant to see him
dead before he could speak. Jimmy had gone first, as he
was judged the least likely to make noise. Next came
Baru, and the hillman moved through the rocks with the
practised ease of one mountain-born. Laurie and Roald
moved very slowly, and Martin wondered if he could
hold his target for the week it was taking them to pass.
Then at last Arutha slipped past, the light breeze making
enough noise to disguise the faint scuff of boot upon
rock as he stepped down into a shallow depression. He
scampered along until he joined with the others, out of
sight of the sentry. Within seconds Martin, then Galain,
followed, and the elf went past to take point again.
Martin signalled he would go after, and Arutha motioned
agreement. In a moment Laurie and Roald followed. Just
before he turned to follow, Jimmy put his face before
Martin and Arutha's and whispered, 'When we get back,
the first thing I'm going to do is scream my bloody head
off.' With a playful swat, Martin sent him along. Arutha
looked at Martin and silently mouthed the words, "Me
too.' Then the Prince was going down the wash. Martin
took a last backwards glance, then followed.

Silently they lay in a depression near the road, a small
ridge of rock hiding them from the passing moredhel
horsemen. Reluctant even to breathe, they remained
motionless as the riders seemed to pause in their slow
passage. For a long, torturous moment, Arutha and his
companions feared discovery. Just as every nerve seemed
to scream for action, as every muscle demanded motion,
the riders continued along their patrol. With a sigh of
relief close to a sob, Arutha rolled over and discovered
the trail empty. With a nod to Galain, Arutha ordered a
resumption of the trek. The elf was off along the defile,
and the others slowly rose and followed.
The night wind blew bitter along the face of the
mountains. Arutha sat back against the rocks, looking
where Martin pointed. Galain hugged the opposite wall
of the crevice they crouched in. They had taken a rise
over a crest to the east of the trail, seeming to take them
away from their destination, but a necessary detour to
avoid increasing moredhel activity. Now they looked
down upon a broad canyon, in the middle of which a high
plateau rose upwards. In the centre of the plateau a small
lake could be seen. To their left they could see the trail
returning as it ran past the edge of the canyon, then
disappeared over the crest of the mountains farther up
clearly shown in the light of all three moons.
Where the trail came closest to the edge of the canyons
twin towers of stone had been erected. Another pair
stood opposite on the plateau. Between them a narrow
suspension bridge swayed in the wind. On top of all four
towers torches burned, their flames dancing madly in the
wind. Movement along the bridge and atop the towers
told them the entire area around the plateau was heavily
guarded. Arutha leant back against the rocks. 'Moraelin.'
Galain said, "Indeed. It appears they feared you might
bring an army with you.'
Martin said, "It was a thought.
Arutha said, 'You were right about its comparing to
the road to Sarth. This would have been almost as bad.
We'd have lost a thousand men reaching this point - if
we could have got this far. Across the bridge, single file
It would have been mass slaughter.'
' Martin asked, 'Can you see that black shape across the .?
lake?'
'A building of some sort,' said Galain. He looked
perplexed. "It is unusual to see a building, that building,
any building, though the Valheru were capable of anything.
This is a place of power. That must be a Valheru
building, though I've never heard of its like before.'
'Where shall I find Silverthorn?' asked Arutha.
Galain said, 'Most of the stories say it needs water, so
it grows on the edge of the lake. Nothing more specific.'
' Martin said, 'Now, as to gaining entrance.'
Galain signalled them away from the front end of the
crevice, and they returned to where the others waited.
The elf knelt and drew in the ground. "We are here, with
ridge here. Somewhere down at the base is a small
or large fissure, large enough for a gwali to run
through, so I'd guess it would be big enough for you to
get through. It might be a chimney in the rock you can
climb up, or it might be connecting caves. But Apalla
was emphatic that he and his people had spent some time
on that plateau. They didn't stay long because of the
"'bad thing", but he remembered enough to convince
Tomas and Calin he wasn't confused about being here.
'i've spotted a broken facing on the other side of the
canyon, so we'll work along past the bridge entrance
until we have that black building between myself and the
bridge guards. You'll find what appears to be the start of
a way down there. Even if you can only get a short way
down, you can lower yourself with ropes. Then I'll pull
them up and hide them. '
Jimmy said, 'That'll be really handy when we want to
climb back up.
Galain said, "At sundown tomorrow I'll lower the ropes
again. I'll leave them down until just before sunrise.
Then I'll pull them up again. I'll lower them again the
next night. I think I can stay hidden in the crack in the
broken facing. I may have to scamper into the brush, but
I'll stay free of any moredhel who are looking about.' He
didn't sound too convinced. 'if you need the ropes sooner
than that,' he added with a smile, "simply shout.'
Martin looked at Arutha. "As long as they don't know we're here, we have a
chance. They still look to the south, thinking us  somewhere between
Elvandar and here. As long as we don't give ourselves away . . .'
Arutha said, "It's as good a plan as I can come up with.
Let's go.'
Quickly, for they needed to be down in the canyon
before sunrise, they moved among the rocks, seeking to
reach the far side of the canyon rim.

Jimmy hugged the face of the plateau, hiding in the
shadow below the bridge. The rim of the canyon was
some hundred and fifty feet above them, but there was
still a chance of being seen. A narrow black crack in the
face of the plateau presented itself. Jimmy turned his
head to Laurie and whispered, "of course. It has to be
right under the bridge. '
'Let's just hope they don't bother to look down.'
Word was passed back, and Jimmy entered the fissure.
It was a tight squeeze for only ten feet, then opened into
a cave. Turning back towards the others, he said, "Pass a
torch and flint through.'
As he took them, he heard a movement behind him.
He hissed a warning and spun, his dirk almost flying into
his hand. The faint light coming from behind was more a
hindrance than a help, for it caused most of the cave to
be inky black to his eyes. Jimmy closed his eyes, relying
on his other senses. He backed up and towards the crack,
saying a silent prayer to the god of thieves.
From ahead he heard a scrabbling sound, like claws
on rock, and heard a slow, heavy breathing. Then he
remembered the gwali talking of a 'bad thing' that ate
one of his tribe.
Again came the noise, this time much closer, and
Jimmy wished fervently for a light. He moved to the right
as he heard Laurie speak his name in a questioning tone.
The boy hissed, 'There's some kind of animal in here.
Jimmy could hear Laurie say something to the others
and the scramble as the singer moved back, away from the
cave entrance. Faintly he could hear someone, perhaps
Roald, saying, 'Martin's coming.
Holding on to the knife with fierce intensity, Jimmy
thought to himself, yes, if it comes to fighting animals, I'd
send in Martin, too. He expected the large Duke of
Crydee to leap in beside him at any moment and wondered
what was taking so long.
Then there was sudden movement towards the boy and
he leapt back and up, instinctively, almost climbing a
rock face. Something struck his lower leg, and he could
hear the snapping of jaws. Jimmy turned in midair and,
using his native abilities, tucked and rolled with the fall,
coming down on something that wasn't rock. Without
hesitation, jimmy lashed out with his dirk, feeling the
point dig into something. He continued to roll off the
back of the creature while a reptilian hiss and snarl filled
the cave. The boy twisted as he came to his feet, pulling
the dirk free. The creature spun, moving quickly, almost
as quickly as Jimmy, who leapt away from the creature,
blindly, and struck his head against a low-hanging outcropping
of rock.
Stunned, Jimmy fell hard against the wall as the creature
launched itself again, again missing by only a little.
Jimmy, half stunned, reached out with his left hand and
found his arm wrapping around the thing's neck. Like the
legendary man riding the tiger, Jimmy couldn't release
his hold, for the creature could not reach him as long as
he held fast. Jimmy sat, letting the animal drag him
around the cave, while he stabbed repeatedly at the
leathery hide. With little leverage, his blows were mostly
ineffective. The creature thrashed about, and Jimmy was '
battered against the rock walls and scraped as he was
dragged about the cave. Jimmy felt panic rising up inside,
for the animal seemed to be gaining in fury, and his arm
felt as if it would be torn from his shoulder. Tears of fear
ran down the boy's cheeks, and he hammered at the
creature in terror. 'Martin,' he half shouted, half gulped,
Where was he? Jimmy felt with sudden certainty that he
was at last at the end of his vaunted luck. For the first
time he could remember, he felt helpless, for there was
nothing he could do to extricate himself from this situation.
He felt himself go sick to his stomach and numb all
over and, with dread certainty, felt fear for his life: not
the exhilarating thrill of danger during a chase across the
Thieves' Highway, but a horrible numbing sleepiness as if
he wished to curl up in a ball and end it all.
The creature leapt about, banging Jimmy against the
wall repeatedly, and suddenly was still. Jimmy continued
to stab at it for a moment, then a voice said, "It's dead.'
The still-woozy thief opened his eyes and saw Martin
standing over him. Baru and Roald stood behind, the
mercenary with a lit torch. Next to the boy lay a lizardlike
creature, seven feet in length, looking like nothing as
much as an iguana with a crocodile's jaws, Martin's
hunting knife through the back of its skull. Martin knelt
before Jimmy. 'You all right?'
Jimmy scuttled away from the thing, still showing signs
of panic. When it penetrated his fear-clouded senses that
he was unhurt, the boy shook his head vigorously. 'No,
I'm not all right.' He wiped away the tearstains on his
face and said, 'No, damn it all, I'm not.' Then, with tears
again coming, he said, 'Damn it. I thought I. . .'
Arutha came through the fissure last and took stock of
the boy's condition. He moved next to the boy, who
leant tearfully against the rock wall. Gently placing his
hand upon Jimmy's arm, he said, "It's over. You're all
right.'
His voice betraying a mixture of anger and fear, Jimmy
said, 'I thought it had me. Damn, I've never been so
scared in my life.'
Martin said, "If you're going to be scared of something
at long last, Jimmy, this beastie is a good choice. Look at
the jaws on it.'
Jimmy shivered. Arutha said, "We all get scared,
Jimmy. You've just finally found something to be truly
fearful of. '
Jimmy nodded. "I hope it doesn't have a big brother
about.'
Arutha said, 'Did you sustain any wounds?'
Jimmy took a quick inventory. 'Just bruises.' Then he
winced. 'A lot of bruises.'
 Baru said, "A rock serpent. Good-sized one. You did
Well killing it with that knife, Lord Martin.'
In the light the creature looked respectable, but nothing
like the horror Jimmy had imagined in the dark. "That's
the bad thing"?'
Martin said, 'Most likely. As bad as it looked to you,
imagine what it looks like to a three-foot-tall gwali.' He
held up his torch as Laurie and Arutha entered. 'Let's
see what this place is like.'
They were in a narrow but high-ceilinged chamber,
mostly limestone, from its look. The floor climbed slightly
as it moved away from the fissure that led outside.
Jimmy appeared ragged, but went to the fore, taking
Martin's torch and saying, 'i'm still the expert at climbing
into places I'm not welcome.'
They moved quickly through a series of chambers, each
slightly larger and located higher up than the others. The
connecting chambers had an odd appearance and strange
feel to them, somehow disquieting. The plateau was large
enough for them to move for some time without much
sense of moving upwards, until Jimmy said, 'We move in
a spiral. I'll swear we're now above the place where
Martin killed that rock serpent.'
They continued their progress until they came to an
apparent dead end. Looking about, Jimmy pointed
upwards. Above their heads by three feet was an opening
in the roof. 'A chimney,' said Jimmy. "You climb up by
putting your back to one side and feet to the other.'
'What if it widens too much?' asked Laurie.
"Then it's usual to come back down. The rate of descent
is up to you. I suggest you do it slowly.'
Martin said, 'if the gwali can get up there, we should
be able.'
Roald said, 'Beggin' Your Grace's pardon, but do you
think you could swing through the trees like them, too?'
Ignoring the remark, Martin said, "Jimmy?'
'Yes, I'll go first. I'll not end my days because one of
you lost his grip and fell on me. Keep clear of the opening
until I call down.'
With assistance from Martin, Jimmy easily made it into
the chimney. It was a good fit, with just enough room to
negotiate easily. The others, especially Martin and Baru,
would find it a tight fit, but they would squeeze through.
Jimmy quickly made it to the top, about thirty feet from
the chamber below, and found another cave. Without
light he couldn't tell its size, but faint echoes of his
breathing told him it was a good size. He lowered himself
down just far enough to call the come ahead, then
scrambled up to the lip.
By the time the first head, Roald's, Popped into view,
Jimmy had a torch lit. Quickly they all climbed up the
chimney. The cave was large, easily two hundred feet
across. The roof averaged a full twenty-five feet high.
Stalagmites rose from the floor, some joining together
with the stalactites above to form limestoae pillars. The
cave was a forest of stone. In the distance several other
caves and passages could be seen.
Martin looked about. 'How high do you judge we've
climbed, Jimmy?'
'No more than seventy feet. Not yet halfway.'
'Now which way?' asked Arutha.
Jimmy said, "Nothing for it except to try them one at a
time.'
Picking one of the many exits, he marched towards it.

After hours of searching, Jimmy turned to Laurie and
said, 'The surface.'
Word was passed and Arutha squeezed up past the
singer to look. Above the boy's head was a narrow
passage, little more than a crack. Arutha could see light
above, almost blinding after the faintly lit passages. With
a nod, Jimmy climbed up until he blocked out the
brilliance above.
When he returned, he said, "It comes out in an outcropping
of rocks. We're about a hundred yards from the
bridge side of the black building. It's a big thing, two
storeys tall.'
'Any guards?'
"None I could see.'
Arutha considered, then said, 'We'll wait until dark.
Jimmy, can you hang close to the surface and listen!'
"There's a ledge,' said the boy and scrambled back
upwards. Arutha sat and the others did likewise, waiting for
darkness to come.

Jimmy tensed and relaxed muscles to avoid cramping.
The top of the plateau was deathly silent, except for an
occasional sound carried by the wind. Mostly he heard a
stray word or the sounds of boots coming from the
direction of the bridge. Once he thought he heard a
strange, low sound coming from the black building, but
he couldn't be certain. The sun had dipped beneath the
horizon, although the sky still glowed. It was certainly
two hours after normal suppertime, but this high on the
face of the mountains, this close to Midsummer. and this
far north, the sun set long after it did in Krondor. Jimmy
reminded himself that he had worked jobs before where
he'd had to skip meals, but somehow that didn't stop his
stomach from demanding attention.
At last it was dark enough. Jimmy, for one, was glad,
and it seemed the others shared his feelings. Something
about this place brought them to the edge of outright
agitation. Even Martin had several times been heard
muttering curses at the need to wait. No, there was
something alien about this place, and it was a subtle sort
of effect they were feeling. Jimmy knew he wouldn't feel
secure again until this place was miles behind him and a
dim memory. Jimmy climbed out and kept watch while Martin came

next, followed by the others. By agreement they split up
into three groups: Baru with Laurie, Roald with Martin
and Jimmy with the Prince. They would scout the lakeshore
for the plant, and as soon as one found it he would
return to the crack in the rocks, waiting down below for
his companions.
Arutha and Jimmy were slated to move towards the
big black building, and by agreement had decided to
begin their search behind the building. It seemed wise to
check for guards before searching near the ancient
Valheru edifice. It was impossible to know the'moredhel
attitude towards the place. They might hold it in similar
awe to the elves and refuse to enter, give it wide berth
until some ceremony, as if it were a shrine, or they might
be inside the building in numbers.
Slipping through the dark, Jimmy reached the edge of
the building and hugged it. The stones felt unusually
smooth. Jimmy ran his hand over them and discovered
they were textured like marble. Arutha waited, weapons
ready, while Jimmy did a quick circumnavigation of the
building. 'No one in sight,' he whispered, "except at the
bridge towers.'
'inside?' Arutha hissed.
Jimmy said, 'Don't know. It's a big place, but only one
door. Want to look?' He hoped the Prince would say no.
'Yes.'
Jimmy led Arutha down along the wall and around the
corner, until he came to the solitary door to the large
building. Above it was a half-circle window, with a faint
light showing. Jimmy signalled for Arutha to give him a
boost, and the young thief scampered up to the cornice
above the door. He gripped it and pulled himself up to
peek through the window.
Jimmy peered about. Below him, behind the door, was
an ante-room of some sort, with a stone slab floor.
Beyond, double doors opened into darkness. Jimmy
noticed something strange about the wall below the
window. The exterior stone was only facing.
Jimmy jumped back down. 'There's nothing I can see
from the window.'
"Nothing?' 'There's a passage into the darkness, that's all, no sign

of any guards.' 'Let's start looking around the lake's edge, but keep an

eye on this building. Jimmy agreed and they headed down towards the lake.

The building was beginning to make his "something's odd'
bump itch, but he shoved aside any distraction and
concentrated on the search.

Hours were spent stalking the shore. Few water plants
lined the lake's edge, the plateau was almost devoid of
flora. In the distance there would be an occasional faint
rustling sound, which Arutha supposed came from one of
the other pairs who searched.
When the sky became grey, Jimmy alerted Arutha
to the coming dawn. Giving up in disgust, the Prince
accompanied the boy thief back to the crevice. Laurie
and Baru were already there and Martin and Roald
joined them a few minutes later. All reported no sight of
Silverthorn. Arutha remained  silent, turning slowly until his back
was to the others. Then he clenched his fist, looking as if
he had been struck a terrible blow. All eyes were on him
as he stared away into the darkness of the cave, his
profile etched in relief by the faint light from above, and
all saw tears upon his cheeks. Suddenly he spun to
confront his companions. Hoarsely he whispered, "It must
be here.' He looked at each of them
in turn, and they glimpsed something in his eyes: a depth of feeling, a

sense of overwhelming loss that caused them to share his
dread. All of them saw suffering and something dying. If
there was no Silverthorn, Anita was lost.
Martin shared his brother's pain, and more, for in this
instant he saw his father, in those quiet moments before
Arutha had been old enough to know the depths of
Borric's loss of his Lady Catherine. The elver-taught
hunter felt his own chest constrict at the thought of his
brother reliving those lonely nights before the hearth,
beside an empty chair, with only a portrait over the fire
to gaze upon. Of the three brothers, only Martin had
glimpsed the profound bitterness that had haunted their
~father's every waking moment. If Anita died, Arutha's
heart and joy might well die with her. Unwilling to
surrender hope, Martin whispered, "It will be here
somewhere. '
Jimmy added, 'There is one place we haven't looked.'
Arutha said, "Inside that building.' Martin said,
"Then there's only one thing to do.'
 Jimmy hated to hear himself say, "One of us must get
inside and take a look.' 17

Warlord

The cell stank.
pug stirred and found his hands tethered to the wall
with needrahide chains. The skin of the stolid, six-legged
Tsurani beast of burden had been treated to almost the
hardness of steel and was anchored firmly to the wall.
Pug's head ached from the encounter with the strange
magic-disrupting device. But there was another irritation.
He fought off his mental sluggishness and looked at the
manacles. As he began to incant a spell that would cause
the chains to change to insubstantial gases, a sudden
'wrongness occurred. He could put no other name to it
but a wrongness. His spell would not work. Pug sat back
"against the wall, knowing the cell had been blanketed by
some ensorcellment neutralizing any other magic. Of
course, he thought: how else does one keep a magician in
jail?
Pug looked about the room. It was a dark pit of a cell
with only a little light coming through a small barred
opening high in the door. Something small and busy
bustled through the straw near Pug's foot. He kicked and
it scurried off. The walls were damp, so he judged that
he and his companions were below ground. He had no
Way of telling how long they had been here, nor had he
any idea where they were;' they could be anywhere upon
the world of Kelewan.
Meecham and Dominic were chained to the wall
opposite Pug, while to his right Hochopepa Was likewise
bound. Pug knew at once that the Empire rested upon a
fine balancing point for the Warlord to risk bringing harm
to Hochopepa. To capture a denounced renegade was
one thing, but to incarcerate a Great One of the Empire
was another. By rights, a Great One should be immune
to the dictates of the Warlord. Besides the Emperor, a
Great One was the only possible challenge to the Warlord's
 rule. Kamatsu had been correct. The Warlord was
nearing some major ploy or offensive in the Game of the
Council, for the imprisonment of Hochopepa showed
contempt for any possible opposition.
Meecham groaned and slowly looked up. "My head,'
he mumbled. Finding himself chained, he tugged experimentally
at his bonds. "Well,' he said, looking at Pug,
'what now?'
Pug looked back and shook his head. 'We wait.'
It was a long wait, perhaps three or four hours. When
someone appeared, it was suddenly. Abruptly the door
had swung open and a black-robed magician entered,
followed by a soldier of the Imperial Whites. Hochopepa
nearly spat as he said, "Ergoran! are you mad? Release
me at once!'
The magician motioned for the soldier to release Pug.
He said to Hochopepa, "I do what I do for the Empire.
You consort with our enemies, fat one. I will bring word
to the Assembly of your duplicity when we have finished
with our punishment of this false magician.
Pug was quickly herded outside and the magician
named Ergoran said, 'Milamber, your display at the
Imperial Games a year ago has earned you some respect
enough to ensure you do not wreak any more havoc
upon those around you.' Two soldiers fastened rare and
costly metal bracelets upon his wrists. "The wards placed
in this dungeon prevent any spell from operating within.
Once you are outside the dungeon, these bracelets will
cancel your powers.' He motioned for the guards to bring
pug and one pushed him from behind.
Pug knew better than to waste time on Ergoran. Of all
those magicians called the Warlord's pets, he had been
among the most rabid. He was one of the few magicians
who believed that the Assembly should be an arm of the
ruling body of the Empire, the High Council. It was
supposed by some who knew him that Ergoran's ultimate
goal was to see the Assembly become the High Council.
It had been rumoured that while the hot-tempered almecho
had publicly ruled, as often as not Ergoran had been
the one behind him deciding the policy of the War Party.
A long flight of stairs brought Pug into sunlight. After
the darkness of the cell he was blinded for a moment. As
he was pushed along through the courtyard of' some
immense building, his eyes quickly adjusted. He was
taken up a broad flight of stairs, and as he climbed, Pug
lOoked over his shoulder. He could see enough landmarks
'to know where he was. He saw the river Gagajin, which
~' from the mountains called the High Wall down to the
.city of Jamar. It was the major north-south thoroughfare
for the Empire's central proVinces. Pug was in the Holy
City itself, Kentosani, the capital of the Empire of Tsuranuanni.
And from the dozens of white-armoured guards,
he knew he was in the Warlord's palace.
Pug was pushed along through a long hall until he
reached a central chamber. The stone walls ended, and a
rigid, painted wood-and-hide door was slid aside. A
personal council chamber was where the Warlord of the
Empire chose to interrogate his prisoner.
Another magician stood near the centre of the room,
waiting upon the pleasure of a man who sat reading a
scroll. The second magician was one Pug knew only
slightly, Elgahar. Pug realized he could expect no aid
here, even for Hochopepa, for Elgahar was Ergoran's
brother, magic talent had run deep in their family.
Elgahar had always seemed to take his lead from his
brother.
The man sitting upon a pile of cushions was of middle
years, wearing a white robe with a single golden band
trimming the neck and sleeves. Remembering Almecho,
the last Warlord, Pug couldn't think of a more striking '"
contrast. This man, Axantucar, was the antithesis of
his uncle in appearance. While Almecho had been a
bullnecked, stocky man, a warrior in his manner, this
man was more like a scholar or teacher. His wire-thin
body made him look the ascetic. His features were almost
delicate. Then he lifted his gaze up from the parchment
he had been reading and Pug could see the resemblance:
this man, like his uncle, had the same mad hunger for
power in his eyes.
Slowly putting away his scroll, the Warlord said,
'Milamber, you show courage, if not prudence, in returning.
You will of course be executed, but before we have
you hung, we would like to know one thing: why have
you returned?'
(Upon my homeworld a power grows, a dark and evil
presence that seeks to advance its cause, and that cause is
the destruction of my homeland.'
The Warlord seemed interested and motioned for Pug
to continue. Pug told all he knew, completely and without
embellishment or exaggeration. 'Through magic means I
have determined that this thing is of Kelewan, somehow
the fates of both worlds are again intertwined.'
When he was finished, the Warlord said, 'You spin an
interesting tale.' Ergoran appeared to brush aside Pug's
story, but Elgahar looked genuinely troubled. The Warlord
went on, 'Milamber, it is truly a shame you were
taken from us during the betrayal. Had you remained,
we might have found employment for you as a storyteller.
A great power of darkness, aborning from some
forgotten recess within our Empire. What a wonderful
tale.' The man's smile vanished and he leant forward,
elbow upon knee, as he looked at Pug. 'Now, to the
truth. This shabby nightmare you spin is but a weak
attempt to frighten me into ignoring your true reasons for
returning. The Blue Wheel Party and its allies are on the
verge of collapse in the High Council. That is why you
return, for those who counted you as ally before are
desperate, knowing the utter domination of the War
Party to be all but a fact. You and the fat one are again
in league with those who betrayed the Alliance for War
during the invasion of your homeworld. You fear the
new order of things we represent. Within days I shall
announce the end of the High Council, and you have
come to thwart that event, true? I don't know what you
have in mind, but we shall have the truth from you, if not
now, then soon. And you shall name those who stand
arrayed against us.
'And we will have the means of your return. Once the
Empire is secure under my rule, then shall we return to
your world and quickly do what should have been done
under my uncle. '
Pug looked from face to face and knew the truth. Pug
had met and spoken with Rodric, the mad King. The
Warlord was not as mad as the King had been, but there
was no doubt that he was not entirely sane. And behind
him stood one who betrayed little, but just enough, for
Pug to understand. Ergoran was the power to be feared
here, for he was the true genius behind the dominance
of the War Party. It would be he who would rule in
Tsuranuanni, perhaps, someday, even openly.
A messenger arrived and bowed before the Warlord,
handing him a parchment. The Warlord read quickly,
then said, "I must go to the council. Inform the inquisitor
I require his services the fourth hour of the night. Guards,
return this one to his cell.' As the guards pulled Pug
about by his chain, the Warlord said, "Think on this,
Milamber. You may die slowly or quickly, but you will
die. The choice is yours. Either way, we shall have the
truth from you eventually.'

Pug watched as Dominic entered his trance. Pug had told
his companions of the Warlord's reaction, and after
Hochopepa had raged on for a time, the fat magician
had lapsed into silence. Like others of the black robe,
Hochopepa found the notion of any whim of his being
ignored almost unfathomable. This imprisonment was
nearly impossible to contemplate. Meecham had shown
his usual taciturnity, while the monk had also seemed
unperturbed. The discussion had been short and resigned.
Dominic had soon after begun his exercises, fascinating
to Pug. He had sat and begun meditating until he was
now entering some sort of trance. In the silence, Pug
considered the monk's lesson. Even in this cell, apparently
without hope, there was no need for them to
surrender to fear and become mindless wretches. Pug
turned his mind back, remembering his boyhood at
Crydee: the frustrating lessons with Kulgan and Tully, as
he sought to master a magic that he would discover, years
later, he was unsuited to practise. A shame, he thought
to himself. There were many things he had observed
during his time at Stardock that had convinced him
the Lesser Magic of Midkemia was significantly further
advanced than on Kelewan. Most likely, it was a result of
there being only one magic on Midkemia.
For variety, Pug tried one of the cantrips taught him by
Kulgan as a boy, one he had never mastered anyway.
Hmm, he mused, the Lesser Path spell isn't affected. He
began to encounter the strange blocking from within
himself and almost felt amusement at it. As a boy he had
feared that experience, for it signalled failure. Now he
knew it was simply his mind, attuned to the Greater
Path, rejecting Lesser Path discipline. Still, somehow the
effects of the anti-magic wards caused him to attack the
problem more obliquely. He closed his eyes, imagining
the one thing he had tried on innumerable occasions,
failing each time. The pattern of his mind balked at the
requirements of that magic, but as it shifted to take on its
normal orientation, it somehow rebounded against the
wards, recoiled, and . . . Pug sat up, eyes wide. He had
almost found it! For the briefest instant he had almost
understood. Fighting down excitement, he closed his
,eyes, head down, and concentrated. If he could only find
that one instant, that one crystalline instant when he had
understood . . . an instant that had fled as soon as it had
come . . . In this dank, squalid cell he had stood upon
the brink of perhaps one of the most important discoveries
in the history of Tsurani magic. If only he could recapture
that instant . . .
Then the doors to the cell opened. Pug looked up, as
did Hochopepa and Meecham. Dominic remained in his
trance. Elgahar entered, motioning for a guard to close
the door behind him. Pug stood, uncramping legs that
had succumbed to the cold stones beneath the straw while
he had meditated upon his boyhood.
'What you say is disturbing,' said the black-robed
magician.
'As it should be, for it is true.'
'Perhaps, but it may not be, even if you believe it to be
true. I would hear everything.'
Pug motioned for the magician to sit, but he shook his
head in negation. Shrugging, Pug returned to his place on
the floor and began his narrative. When he reached
the portion relating to Rogen's vision, Elgahar became
observably agitated, halting Pug to ask a series of questions.
Pug continued, and when he was through, Elgahar
shook his head. 'Tell me, Milamber, on your homeworld,
are there many who could have understood what was said
to this seer in the vision?'
'No. Only myself and one or two others could have
understood it, only the Tsurani in LaMut would have
recognized it as ancient High Temple Tsurani.'
'There is a frightening possibility. I must know if you've
considered it.'
'What?'
Elgahar leant close to Pug and whispered a single word
in his ear. Colour drained from Pug's face and he closed
his eyes. Back on Midkemia, his mind had begun the
process of intuiting what it could from the information at
hand. He had subconsciously known all along what the
answer would be. With a single, long sigh, he said, "I
have. At every turn I have shied from admitting that
possibility, but it is always there.'
Hochopepa said, "What is this you speak of?'
Pug shook his head. 'No, old friend. Not yet. I want
Elgahar to consider what he has deduced without hearing
your opinion or mine. This is something that must make
him reevaluate his loyalties.
'Perhaps. But even if I do, it will not necessarily alter
our present circumstance.'
Hochopepa exploded in rage. "How can you say such a
thing. What circumstance can matter in the face of the
Warlord's crimes? Have you come to the point where all
your free will has been surrendered to your brother?'
Elgahar said, "Hochopepa, you of all who wear the
black robe should understand, for it was you and fumita
who played in the Great Game for years with the Blue
Wheel Party.' He spoke of those two magicians' part in
helping the Emperor end the Riftwar. 'For the first time
in the history of the Empire, the Emperor is in a unique
position. With the betrayal at the peace conference, he
has come to the position of having ultimate authority
while having lost face. He may not use his influence, and
he will not again utilize his authority. Five clan Warchiefs
died in that betrayal, the five most likely to achieve the
office of Warlord. Many families lost position in the High
Council because of their deaths. Should he again attempt
to order the clans, he may be refused.'
'You speak of regicide,' said Pug.
"It has happened before, Milamber. But that would
mean civil war, for there is no heir. The Light of Heaven
is young and has yet to father sons. Of his issue there are
only three girls as yet. The Warlord desires only the
stabilization of the Empire, not the overthrow of a
dynasty more than two thousand years old. I have neither
affection nor disaffection for this Warlord. But the
Emperor must be made to understand that his position in
the order of things is spiritual only, surrendering all final
authority to the Warlord. Then shall Tsuranuanni enter
an era of endless prosperity.'
Hochopepa barked a bitter laugh. "That you can believe
such drivel shows only that our screening at the Assembly
is not rigorous enough. '
Ignoring the insult, Elgahar said, "Once the internal
order of the Empire has been made stable, then we can
counter any possible threat you may herald. Even should
what you say be true and my speculation prove accurate,
there may be years before we need deal with the issue
upon Kelewan - ample time to prepare. You must remember,
we of the Assembly have reached new pinnacles of
power never dreamt of by our ancestors. What may have
been a terror to them may prove only a nuisance to
ourselves. '
'You fail in your arrogance, Elgahar. All of you. Hocho
and I have discussed this before. Your assumption of
supremacy is in error. You have not surpassed your
ancestors' might, you have yet to equal it. Among the
works of Macros the Black I have found tomes that reveal
powers undreamt of in the millennia the Assembly's
existed.'
Elgahar seemed intrigued by the notion and was silent
for a long time. 'Perhaps,' he said in a thoughtful tone at
last. He moved towards the door. 'You have
accomplished one thing, Milamber. You convince me it is
vital to keep you alive longer than the Warlord's pleasure
dictates. You have knowledge we must extract. As to the
rest, I must . . . think upon it.'
Pug said, "Yes, Elgahar, think upon it. Think upon one
word: that which you whispered in my ear.'
Elgahar seemed on the verge of saying something, then
spoke to the guard outside, ordering the door opened
He left, and Hochopepa said, "He's mad.'
'No,' said Pug. 'Not mad, he simply believes what his
brother tells him. Anyone who can look into Axantucar's
and Ergoran's eyes and think they are the ones to bring
prosperity to the Empire is a fool, a believing idealist,
but not mad. Ergoran is the one we must truly fear.'
They settled back to silence, and Pug returned to
brooding on what Elgahar had whispered to him. The
chilling possibility that it represented was too dreadful to
dwell upon, so he turned his mind to consider again the
strange moment where for the first time in his life he
glimpsed the true mastery of the Lesser Path.

Time had passed. Pug didn't know how long, but he
assumed it was four hours past sunset, the time the
Warlord had set for interrogation. Guards entered the
cell, unshackling Meecham, Dominic, and Pug. Hochopepa
was left behind.
They were marched to a room equipped with devices
of torture. The Warlord stood resplendent in green and
golden robes, speaking to the magician Ergoran. A man
in a red hood waited silently while the three prisoners
were shackled to pillars in the room, situated so they
could see one another.
'Against my better judgment, Ergoran and Elgahar
have convinced me it would be beneficial to keep you
alive, though each has different reasons. Elgahar seemed
inclined to believe your story somewhat, at least enough
to think it prudent to learn all we may. Ergoran and I are
not so disposed, but there are other things we wish to
know. Therefore we shall begin to ensure we have only
the truth from you.' He signalled to the Inquisitor, who
tore Dominic's robes from him, leaving him wearing only
a loincloth. The Inquisitor opened a sealed pot and took
out a stick heavy with some whitish substance. He daubed
some on Dominic's chest and the monk stiffened. Without
metals, the Tsurani had developed methods of torture
different from those used on Midkemia, but equally as
effective. The substance was a sticky caustic that began
'to blister the skin as soon as administered. Dominic
screwed his eyes shut and bit back a cry.
"For reasons of economy, we thought you'd be more
willing to tell us the truth if your companions were given
attention first. From what your former compatriots tell
me and from that unforgivable outburst at the Imperial
Games, you seem to have a compassionate nature,
Milamber. Will you tell us the truth?'
'Everything I have said is true, Warlord. torturing my
friends will not change that!'
 'Master!' came a cry.
The Warlord looked at his Inquisitor. 'What?'
'This man . . . look.' Dominic had lost his pained
expression. He hung from the pillar, beatific peace upon

his face.
Ergoran stepped up before the monk and examined
him. 'He's in some manner of trance?'
Both Warlord and magician looked at Pug, and the
magician said, 'What tricks does this false priest practise,
Milamber?'
"He is no priest of Hantukama, true, but he is a cleric

of my world. He can place his mind at rest regardless of
what occurs with his body.'
The Warlord nodded towards the inquisitor, who
removed a sharp knife from the table. He stepped before
the monk and, with a sudden cut, sliced open his shoulder.
Dominic did not move, not even an involuntary twitch, in
reaction. Using pincers, the inquisitor took a hot coal
and applied it to the cut. Again the monk did not react.
The Inquisitor put away his pincers and said, "It is
useless, master. His mind is blocked away. We've had
this problem with priests before.'
Pug's brow furrowed. While not free of politics, the
temples tended to be circumspect in their relationship
with the High Council. If the Warlord had been interrogating
priests, that indicated movement on the part of the
temples towards those allied against the War Party. From
Hochopepa's ignorance of this fact, it also meant the
Warlord was moving covertly and had stolen the march
on his opposition. As much as anything, this told Pug
that the Empire was in serious straits, even now poised
on the brink of civil war. The assault upon those who
stood with the Emperor would come soon.
'This one's no priest,' said Ergoran, coming up to
meecham. He looked up at the tall franklin. "He's a
simple slave, so he should prove more manageable.'
Meecham spat full in the magician's face. Ergoran, used
to the unhesitating fear and respect due a Great One,
was as stunned as if he had been clubbed. He staggered
back, wiping spittle from his face. Enraged, he said
coldly, 'You've earned a slow, lingering death, slave.'
Meecham smiled, for the first time Pug could remember,
a broad grin, almost leering. His face was rendered
bFssibly demonic by the scar on his cheek. "It was
worth it, you genderless mule.'
In his anger, Meecham had spoken in the King's
Tongue, but the tone of the insult was not lost on the
magician. He reached over, pulled the sharp blade from
the Inquisitor's table, and slashed a long furrow on
meecham's chest. The franklin stiffened, his face draining
of colour as the wound began to bleed. Ergoran stood
before him in triumph. Then the Midkemian spat again.
"The Inquisitor turned to the Warlord. "Master, the
Great One is interfering with delicate work.'
The magician stepped back, letting the knife drop. He
~ wiped the spittle from his face as he returned to the
Warlord's side. With hatred in his voice, he said, "Don't
be too hasty in speaking what you know, Milamber. I
wish this carrion a long session.'
Pug struggled to battle with the magic neutralizing propperties of the
bracelets upon his wrists, but to no
avail. The Inquisitor began to work upon Meecham, but
the stoic franklin refused to cry out. For half an hour the
inquisitor practised his bloody trade, until at last Meecham
sounded a strangled groan and passed into semiconsciousness.
The Warlord said, "Why have you
returned, Milamber?'
Pug, feeling Meecham's pain as if it were his own, said,
i've told you the truth.' He looked at Ergoran. "You
know it's the truth.' He knew his plea fell on deaf ears,
for the enraged magician wished Meecham to suffer for
spite, not caring that Pug had told all.
The Warlord indicated to the Inquisitor that he was to
begin upon pug. The red-hooded man tore Pug's robes
open. The pot of caustic was opened and a small daub
was applied to Pug's chest. Years of hard work as a slave
in the swamp had left Pug a lean, muscled man, and his
body tensed as the pain began. At first daub there had
been no sensation, then an instant later pain seared his
flesh as the chemicals in the paste reacted. Pug could
almost hear the skin blister. The Warlord's voice cut
through the pain. 'Why have you returned? Whom have
you contacted?'
Pug closed his eyes against the fire on his chest. He
sought refuge in the calming exercises Kulgan had taught
him as an apprentice. Another daub of paste and another
fire erupted, this time on the sensitive flesh inside his
thigh. Pug's mind rebelled and sought to find refuge in
magic. Again and again he battled to break through the
barrier imposed by the magic limiting bracelets. In his
youth he had been able to find his path to magic ~ only
under great stress. When his life had been threatened by
trolls, he had found his first spell. When battling Squire
Roland, he had lashed out magically, and when he had
destroyed the Imperial Games, it had been from a deeply
held well of anger and outrage. Now his mind was an
enraged animal, bouncing off the bars of a magically
imposed cage, and like an animal, he reacted blindly,
striking against the barrier again and again, determined
either to be free or to die.
Hot coals were placed against his flesh and he screamed.
It was an animal cry, mixed pain and rage, and his
mind lashed out. His thoughts became blurred, as if he
existed in a landscape of reflecting surfaces, a mad spinning
room of mirrors, each casting back an image. He
saw the kitchen boy of Crydee looking back at him in one
surface, then Kulgan's student in another. In a third was
the young squire, and the fourth, a slave in the Shinzawai
swamp camp. But in the reflections behind the reflections,
the mirrors seen within the mirrors, in each he saw a new
thing. Behind the boy in the kitchen he saw a man, a
servant, but there was no doubt who that man was. Pug,
without magic, without training, grown to manhood as a
simple member of the castle's serving staff, laboured in
the kitchen. Behind the image of the young squire he saw
a Kingdom noble, with Princess Carline upon his arm, his
wife. His mind whirled. He frantically sought something.
He studied the image of Kulgan's student. Behind him he
saw the reflected image of an adult practitioner of the
lesser Art. In his mind Pug spun, seeking the origin of
that reflected image within an image, of the Pug grown to
'be a master of the Lesser Magic. Then he saw the source
of that image, a possible future never realized, a chance
of fate having diverted his life from that outcome. But in
the alternate probabilities of his life he found what he
sought. He found an escape. Suddenly he understood. A
way was opened to him and his mind fled down that path.
"." Pug's eyes snapped open and he looked past the redhooded
figure of the Inquisitor. Meecham hung groaning,
again conscious, while Dominic was still lost in a trance.
Pug used a mental ability to turn off his awareness of
the injury done to his body. In an instant he stood
without feeling pain. Then his mind reached towards the
black-robed figure of Ergoran. The Great One of the
empire almost staggered as Pug's gaze locked upon his
.own. For the first time in memory, a magician of the
greater Path employed a talent of the Lesser Path, and
~ engaged Ergoran in a contest of wills.
With mind-shattering force, Pug overwhelmed the
magician, stunning him instantly. The black-robed figure

sagged for a moment until Pug took control of his body.
Closing his own eyes, Pug now saw through Ergoran's.
He adjusted his senses, then had complete command over
the Tsurani Great One. Ergoran's hand shot forward and
a cascade of energies sprang from his fingers, striking the
Inquisitor from behind. Red and purple lines of force
danced along the man's body as he arched and shrieked.
Then the Inquisitor danced across the room like a mad
puppet, his movements jerky and spastic as he cried out
in agony. The Warlord stood briefly stunned, then screamed,
'Ergoran! What insanity is this?' He grabbed at the
magician's robe as the Inquisitor slammed against the far
wall and fell to the stone floor. The instant the Warlord
came into contact with the magician, the painful energies
ceased to strike the Inquisitor and engulfed the Warlord.
Axantucar writhed as he fell back from the onslaught.
The Inquisitor rose from the floor, shaking his head to
clear it, and staggered back towards the captives. The
red-hooded torturer pulled a slender knife from the table,
sensing Pug to be the author of his pain. He stepped
towards Pug, but Meecham gripped his chains and hoisted
himself up. With a heave, Meecham reached out and
encircled the Inquisitor's neck with his legs. In a scissors
grip he held the struggling Inquisitor, squeezing with

tremendous power. The Inquisitor struck at Meecham's
leg with the knife, slashing it across the flesh over and
over, but Meecham kept pressure on. Again and again
the knife cut, until Meecham's legs were covered in his
own blood, but the Inquisitor couldn't cut deeply with
the blood-slick little knife. Meecham only gave a joyous
cry of victory. Then, with a Brunt and a jerk, he crushed

the man's windpipe. As the Inquisitor collapsed, strength
flowed out of the franklin. Meecham dropped, held up
only by his chains. With a weak smile he nodded towards
Pug.
Pug broke off the pain spell and the Warlord fell back
from Ergoran. Pug commanded the magician to approach.
The Great One's mind felt like a soft, malleable thing
under Pug's magic control, 'and somehow Pug knew how
to command the magician to act, while keeping aware of
what he himself was doing.
The magician began freeing Pug from his chains, while
the Warlord struggled to his feet. One hand was free.
Axantucar staggered to the outer door. Pug made a
decision. If he could be free of the bonds, he could
handle any number of guards called in by the Warlord,
but he couldn't control two men and he didn't think he
could keep control of the magician long enough to destroy
the Warlord and free himself. Or could he? Then Pug
recognized the danger. This new magic was proving
difficult and his judgment was slipping. Why was he
allowing the Warlord to gain his freedom? The pain of
torture and the exertion were taking a terrible toll, and
Pug felt himself weakening by the moment. The Warlord
pulled open the door, screaming for guards, and when it
opened, Axantucar grabbed at a spear. With a heave, he
struck Ergoran full in the back. The blow knocked the
magician to his knees before he could loosen Pug's other
hand. It also had the effect of sending a psychic shock
back to strike Pug. Pug screamed in concern with Ergoran's
 dying pain.

Fog shrouded Pug's mind. Then something within
cracked, and his thoughts became a sea of glittering
shards as the mirrors of memory shattered, scraps of past
lessons, images of his family, smells, tastes, and sounds
rang through his consciousness.
They weaved Lights danced through his mind, first scattering motes
.Of starlight, reflections of new vistas within.  , forming a pattern, a
circle, a tunnel, then a
way. He plunged through the way and found himself
upon a new plane of consciousness. New paths were
walked, new understandings achieved. That path opened
to him before, through pain and terror, was now his to
walk at will. At last he stood in command of those powers
which were his legacy.
His vision cleared and he saw soldiers struggling on the
stairs. Pug turned his attention to the remaining shackle
upon his wrist. Suddenly he remembered an old lesson of
Kulgan's. With a caress of his mind, the hardened leather
shackle was made soft and supple again and he pulled his
hand free.
Pug concentrated and the magic-inhibiting bracelets fell
away, broken in half. He looked up at the stairs, and for
the first time the full impact of what he saw registered.
The Warlord and his soldiers had fled the room as some
sort of struggle took place above. A soldier in the blue
armour of the Kanazawai clan lay dead next to an
Imperial White. Pug quickly released Meecham, easing
him to the ground. He was bleeding heavily from the leg
wounds and cuts to his body. Pug sent Dominic a questing
mental message: Return. Dominic's eyes opened at once
as his shackles fell off and Pug said, "Tend to Meecham.'
Without asking for explanation, the monk turned to treat
the wounded franklin.
Pug dashed up the stairs and ran to where Hochopepa
lay imprisoned. He entered the cell and the startled
magician said, "What is it? I heard some noise outside.'
Pug bent over and changed the manacles to soft leather,
"I don't know. Allies, I think. I suspect the Blue WheeLl
Party is attempting to free us.' He pulled Hochopepa's
hands free of the now soft restraints.
Hochopepa stood on wobbly legs. 'We must help them
help us,' he said with resolution. Then he considered his
freedom and the softened restraints. "Milamber, how did
you do that?'
Passing through the door, Pug answered, "I don't know,
Hocho. It will be something to discuss.'
Pug raced up the stairs towards the upper level of the
palace. In the central gallery of the Warlord's palace,
armed men struggled in hand-to-hand combat. Men in
. armour of various colours battled with the Warlord's
Imperial Whites. Looking about the bloody combat, Pug
saw Axantucar fighting past a struggling pair of soldiers.
Two white-armoured soldiers covered his retreat. Pug
closed his eyes and reached out. His eyes opened and he
could see the invisible hand of energy he had created. He
could feel it as he could his own. As if picking up a kitten
by the neck, he reached out and gripped the Warlord.
Raising him up, he drew the struggling, kicking man
towards him. The soldiers' halted their struggle at the
sight of the Warlord above 'them. Axantucar, supreme
warrior of the Empire, shrieked in unashamed terror at
the invisible force that had grabbed him.
Pug pulled him back towards where he and Hocho
stood. Some of the Imperial Whites recovered from their
shock and deduced that the renegade magician must be
the cause of their master's dilemma. Several broke off
from their struggles with the soldiers in coloured armour
and ran to aid the Warlord.

Then a loud voice cried out, 'Ichindar! Ninety-one
times Emperor.'
Instantly every soldier in the room, regardless of which
side he struggled for, dropped to the floor, putting forehead
against the stone. The officers stood with heads
bowed. Only Hochopepa and Pug watched as a cortege
of Warchiefs, all in the armour of those who constituted
the Blue Wheel Party, entered the room. In the forefront,
wearing armour not seen in years, came Kamatsu, again
for a time Warchief of the Kanazawai Clan. Forming up,
they parted to allow the Emperor to enter. Ichindar
supreme authority of the Empire, walked into the hall
resplendent in his ceremonial golden armour. He stalked
to where Pug waited, the Warlord still hanging in midair
above him, and surveyed the scene. At last he said,
'Great One, you do seem to cause difficulty whenever
you appear.' He looked up at the Warlord. "If you'll put
him down, we can get to the bottom of this mess.'
Pug allowed the Warlord to fall, hitting the ground
heavily.

'That is an amazing tale, Milamber,' said Ichindar to Pug.
He sat on the pillows occupied earlier that day by the
Warlord, sipping a cup of the Warlord's chocha. "It would
be simple to say I believe you and that all is forgiven, but
the dishonour visited upon me by those you call elves and
dwarves is an impossible thing to forget.' Around him
stood the Warchiefs of the clans of the Blue Wheel, and
the magician Elgahar.
Hochopepa said, 'if the Light of Heaven will permit
me? Remember they were but tools, soldiers, if you will,
in a game of shah. That this Macros was attempting to
prevent the arrival of the Enemy is but another concern.
That he is responsible for the betrayal rids you of the
responsibility of avenging yourself upon anyone but
Macros. And as he is presumed dead, it is a moot issue.'
The Emperor said, "Hochopepa, your tongue is as
facile as a relli.' He referred to the water-snake-like
creature known for its supple movement. "I will not be
punitive without good cause, but I also am reluctant
to take my former stance of conciliation towards the
Kingdom.'
pug said, 'Majesty, that would not be wise at this time,
in any event.' When Ichindar looked interested in the
comment, Pug continued. 'While I hope that someday
our two nations may meet again as friends, at this time
there are more pressing matters that demand attention,
For the short term, it must be as if the two worlds were
never rejoined.'
The Emperor sat up. 'From what little I understand of
such matters, I suspect you are correct. Larger issues
need to be resolved. I must make a decision shortly that
may forever change the course of Tsurani history.' He
lapsed into silence. For a long time he held his own
council, then said, "When Kamatsu and the others came
to me, telling me of your return and your suspicion of
some black terror of Tsurani origin upon your world, I
wished to ignore it all. I cared nothing for your problems
or those of your world. I was even indifferent to the
possibility of once more invading your land. I was fearful
of acting again, for I had lost much face before the High
Council after the attack on your world.' He seemed lost
in thought a brief moment. "Your world was lovely, what
little I saw before the battle.' He sighed, his green eyes
fastening on Pug. 'Milamber, had Elgahar not come to
the palace, confirming what your allies in the Blue Wheel
Party reported, you most likely would be dead, and I
would soon follow after, and Axantucar on his way to
bloody civil war. He gained the white and gold only
because of the outrage against the betrayal. You prevented
my death, if not some greater calamity for the
Empire. I think that warrants some consideration, though
you know the turmoil in the Empire is just beginning."
Pug said, "I am enough a product of the Empire to
understand that the Game of the Council will become
even more vicious.'
Ichindar looked outside the window, where the body
of Axantucar hung twisting in the wind. "I will have to
consult the historians, but that is the first Warlord hung
by an Emperor, I believe.' Hanging was the ultimate
shame and punishment for a warrior. 'Still, as he no
doubt planned the same fate for myself, I don't think I'm
'likely to have a rebellion, at least not this week.'
The Warchiefs of the High Council who were in attendance
looked at one another. Finally Kamatsu said, 'Light
of Heaven, if I may? The War Party retires in confusion.
The betrayal by the Warlord has robbed them of any
base for negotiation within the High Council. Even as we
speak, the War Party is no more, and its clans and
families will be meeting to discuss which parties to join to
regain some shred of their influence. For now the moderates
rule. '
The Emperor shook his head and in 'a surprisingly
strong tone said, 'No, honoured lord, you are wrong. In
Tsuranuanni I rule.' He stood surveying those around
him. "Until these matters Milamber brought to our attention
are resolved and the Empire is truly safe, or the
threat has been shown to be false, the High Council is
recessed. There will be no new Warlord until I have
commanded an election within the council. Until I decree
otherwise, I am the law.
Hochopepa said, 'Majesty, the Assembly?'
'As before, but be warned, Great One, see to your
brothers. If another Black Robe is ever discovered
involved in a plot against my house, the status of Great
Ones outside the law will end. Even should I be forced to
pit all the armies of the Empire against your magic might ,
even to the utter ruination of the Empire, I will not allow
any to challenge the supremacy of the Emperor again. Is
that understood?' Hochopepa said, "It will be done, Imperial Majesty.

Elgahar's renunciation and his brother's and the Warlord's
 acts will give others in the Assembly pause to
think. "I shall bring the matter before the membership.'
The Emperor said to Pug. "Great One, I cannot instruct
the Assembly to reinstate you, nor am I entirely comfortable
having you around. But until this matter is resolved
you are free to come and go as long as you need. When
you again depart for your homeworld, inform us of
your findings. We shall be willing to accommodate you
somewhat in preventing the destruction of your world, if
we may. Now' - he started for the door - "I must return
to my palace. I have an Empire to rebuild.'
Pug watched as the others left. Kamatsu came up to
him and said, 'Great One, it seems to have ended well
for a time.'
'For a time, old friend. Seek to aid the Light of Heaven,
for his life may be a short one when tonight's decrees are
made public tomorrow.
The Lord of the Shinzawai bowed before Pug. 'Your
will, Great One.'
To Hochopepa, Pug said, "Let's fetch Dominic and
Meecham from where they rest and go to the Assembly,
Hocho. We have work to do.'
'in a moment, for I have a question of Elgahar.' The
stout magician faced the former Warlord's pet. 'Why the
sudden reversal of position? I had always counted you
your brother's tool.'
The slender magician replied, 'What Milamber carried
warning of, upon his homeworld, gave me pause to
think. I spent time weighing all possibilities, and when I
"suggested the obvious answer to Milamber, he concurred.
It was a risk too grave to ignore. Compared to this, all
other matters are inconsequential.'
Hochopepa turned to face Pug. "I do not understand
What does he speak of?'
Pug sagged in fatigue and something more, a deephidden
terror coming to the fore. "I hesitate even to
speak of it.' He looked at those about him. 'Elgahar
concluded something I suspected but was afraid to admit,
even to myself.'
For a moment he was silent, and those in the room
seemed to hold their breath, then he said, 'The Enemy
has returned.'

Pug pushed back the leather-covered volume before him
and said, 'Another dead end.' He passed a hand over his
face, closing tired eyes. He had so much to deal with and
a sense of fleeing time. The discovery of his ability as a
Lesser Path magician he kept to himself. There was a
side to his nature he had never suspected, and he wished
more private conditions under which to explore these
revelations.
Hochopepa and Elgahar looked up from where they
sat reading. Elgahar had worked as hard as any, demonstrating
some wish to make amends. "These records are
in a shambles, Milamber,' he commented.
Pug agreed. "I told Hocho two years ago that the
Assembly had become lax in its arrogance. This confusion
is but one example.' Pug adjusted his black robe. When
his reasons for returning were made known, he had, on a
motion by his old friends, seconded by Elgahar, been
reinstated to full membership without hesitation. Of the
members in attendance, only a few abstained and none
voted in opposition. Each had stood upon the Tower of
Testing and had seen the rage and might of the Enemy.
Shimone, one of Pug's oldest friends in the Assembly
and his former instructor, entered with Dominic. Since
the encounter with the Warlord's Inquisitor the night
before, the priest had shown remarkable recuperative
powers. He had used his magic healing arts on Meecham
and Pug, but something in the way they worked prevented
him from using them upon himself. However, he had also
possessed the knowledge to instruct the magicians at the
Assembly in concocting a poultice that prevented festering
in the cuts and burns he had endured.
'Milamber, this priest friend of yours is a wonder. He
has some marvellous means of cataloguing our works
here.'
Dominic said, 'I have only shared what we have learned
at Sarth. There is a great deal of confusion here, but it is
not as bad as it appears on casual inspection.'
Hochopepa stretched. 'What has me concerned is that
there is little here we don't already know. It is as if the
vision we shared upon the tower is the earliest recollection
of the Enemy, and no other has been recorded.'
'That may be true,' said Pug. 'Remember that most of
the truly great magicians perished at the golden bridge,
leaving only apprentices and Lesser Magicians behind. It
may have been years before any attempt to keep records
commenced.'
Meecham entered carrying a huge bundle of ancient
tomes heavily bound in treated skins. Pug indicated a
spot on the floor nearby and Meecham put them down.
Pug opened the bundle and handed copies of the work
around. Elgahar carefully opened one, the book's binding
creaking as he did. "Gods of Tsuranuanni, these works
are old.'
'Among the oldest in the Assembly,' Dominic said. "It
took Meecham and myself an hour just to locate them
and another to dig them out.'
Shimone said, "This is almost another dialect, it's so
ancient. There are verb usages here, inflections I've never
heard of.'
Hocho said, 'Milamber, listen to this."'And when the
bridge vanished, still did Avsrie insist on council."'
Elgahar said, 'The golden bridge?'
Pug and the others stopped what they were doing
and listened as Hochopepa continued reading. "'Of the
Alstwanabi, those remaining were but thirteen, numbering
Avarie, Marlee, Canon" - the list goes on - '"and
little comfort among them, but Marlee spoke her words
of power and calmed their fears. We are upon this world
made for us by Chakakan" - could that be an ancient
form of "Chochocan"? - "and we shall endure. Those
who watched say we are safe from the Darkness. " The
Darkness? Can it be?'
Pug reread the passage. 'This is the same name used by
Rogen after his vision. It is too far a stretch to be called
coincidence. There is our proof: the Enemy is somehow
involved in the attempts upon Prince Arutha.'
Dominic said, 'There is something else there as well.'
Elgahar agreed. 'Yes, who are "those who watched".?'

Pug pushed away the book, the toll of the last day bringing
on sleep unbidden. Of all those who had searched through
the day with him, only Dominic remained. The Ishapian
monk seemed able to disregard fatigue at will.
Pug closed his eyes, intent on resting them for a short
while only. His mind had been occupied with many
things, and many things he had put aside. Now images
flickered past, but none seemed to abide.
Soon Pug was asleep, and while he slept, he dreamt.
He stood upon the roof of the Assembly again. He
wore the grey of a trainee, as he was shown the tower
steps by Shimone. He knew he must mount, again to face
the storm, again to pass that test which would gain him
the rank of Great One.
He mounted and climbed in his dream, seeing something
at each step, a string of flashing images. A stover
bird struck the water for a fish, its scarlet wings flashing
against the blue of sky and water. Then other images
came flooding in, hot jungles where slaves toiled, a clash
of warriors, a dying soldier, Thun running over the tundra
of the north, a young wife seducing a guard of her
husband's household, a spice merchant at his stall. Then
his vision travelled to the north, and he saw . . .
Ice fields, bitter-cold and swept by steel-edged wind.
He could smell the bitterness of age here. From within a
tower of snow and ice, figures emerged bundled against
the wind. Human-shaped, they walked with a smooth
tread that marked them other than human. They were
beings old and wise in ways unknown to men, and they
sought a sign in the sky. They looked up and they
watched. They watch. Watchers.
Pug sat up, eyes open. 'What is it, Pug?' asked dominick.
'Get the others,' he said. "I know.'

Pug stood before the others, his black robes blowing in
the morning breeze. "You'll have no one with you?"
Hochopepa asked again.
'No, Hocho. You can help by getting Dominic and
Meecham back to my estate so they may return to
Midkemia. I've passed along all I've learned here for
Kulgan and the others, with messages for all who need
know what we've discovered so far. I may be seeking a
legend, trying to find these Watchers in the north. You
can help more by getting my friends back.'
Elgahar stepped forward. 'if it is permitted, I would
accompany your friends to your world.'
Pug said, 'Why?'
"The Assembly has little need for one caught up in the
affairs of the Warlord, and from what you have said,
there are Great Ones in training at your academy who
need instruction. Count it an act of appeasement. I will
remain there, at least for a while, continuing the education
of these trainees.'
Pug considered. 'Very well. Kulgan will instruct you in
what needs be done. Always remember that the rank of
Great One means nothing on Midkemia. You will be
simply one among a community. It will prove difficult.'
Elgahar said, "I shall endeavour.'
Hochopepa said, 'That's a capital idea. I've long wondered
about this barbaric land you hail from, and I could
use a vacation from my wife. I'll go, too.'
'Hocho,' said Pug, laughing, 'the academy is a rough
place, devoid of your usual comforts.'
He stepped forward. 'Never mind that. Milamber,
you'll require allies on your world. I may speak lightly,
but your friends will need help and soon. The Enemy is
something beyond the experience of any of us. We'll start
now to combat it. As for the discomfort, I'll manage.'
"Besides,' said Pug, "you've been licking your lips over

Macros's library ever since I've spoken of it.'
Meecham shook his head. 'Him and Kulgan. Two peas
in a pod.'
Hochopepa said, "What's a pea?'
'You'll discover soon, old friend.' Pug embraced Hocho
and Shimone, shook hands with Meecham and Dominic,
and bowed to the other 'members of the Assembly.
'Follow the instructions on activating the rift as I've
written them. And be certain to close it, once through,
the Enemy may still seek a rift to enter our worlds.
"I go to the Shinzawai estate, the northernmost destination
where I can use a pattern. From there I'll take
horse and cross the ThOu tundra. If the Watchers still
exist, I shall find them and return to Midkemia with what
they know of the Enemy. Then shall we meet again.
Until then, my friends, care for one another.'
Pug incanted the required spell, and with a shimmer he

was gone.
The others stood about awhile.
Finally Hochopepa said, "Come, my friends.'
He looked at Dominic, Meecham, and Elgahar.
"Come, we must make ready.'

18

Vengeance

Jimmy woke with a start.
Someone had walked by on the surface. Jimmy had
slept through the day with the others, awaiting the fall of
night for the investigation of the black building. He had
taken the position closest to the surface.
Jimmy shivered. Throughout the day his dreams had
been alien, haunted by troubling images - not true
nightmares, but rather dreams filled with odd longings
and dim recognitions. It was almost as if he had inherited
another's dreams, and that other hadn't been human.
Somehow he felt lingering memories of rage and hatred.
that left him feeling dirty.
Shaking off the odd, fuzzy feeling, he looked down.
The others were dozing, except for Baru, who seemed to
be meditating. At least, he sat upright with legs crossed
and his hands before him, eyes closed and breath even.
Jimmy cautiously pulled himself upwards, until he was
just below the surface. Two voices sounded some distance
away. " here somewhere.'
.if he was stupid enough to go inside, then the fault is
his,' came another voice .with a strange accent. A Dark
Brother, Jimmy thought.
'Well, I'm not going in after him - not after being
warned to keep clear,' said a second human voice.
'Reitz said to find Jaccon, and you know how he is
about desertion'. If we don't find Jaccon, he'll likely have
our ears just for spite,' complained the first human.
'Reitz is nothing,' came the voice of the moredhel.
'Murad has ordered that none should enter the black
building. Would you invoke his wrath and face his Black
Slayers?'
'No,' said the first human voice, (but you better think
of something to tell Reitz. I'm fresh out . . . '
The voices trailed off. Jimmy waited until the voices
couldn't be heard, then chanced another brief look. Two
humans and a moredhel were walking towards the .bridge,
one of the humans gesturing. They halted at the end of
the bridge, pointing towards the house and explaining
something. It was Murad they were speaking to. At the
far end of the bridge, Jimmy could see an entire company
of human horsemen waiting as the four crossed over.
Jimmy dropped down and woke Arutha. "We've got
company upstairs,' the boy whispered. Lowering his voice
so Baru would not hear, he said, 'And your old scarfaced
friend is back with them.'
'How close is it to sundown?'
'Less than an hour, perhaps two to full darkness.'
Arutha nodded and settled in to wait. Jimmy dropped
past him to the floor of the upper cavern and foraged
through his pack for some jerked beef. His stomach had
been reminding him he had not eaten for the last day
and he decided that if he was going to die tonight, he
might as well eat first.
Time passed slowly, and Jimmy noticed that something
beyond the normal tension expected in this situation had
infected the mood of each of Arutha's company. Martin
and Laurie had both fallen into deep, brooding silences,
and Arutha seemed introverted almost to the point of
being catatonic. Baru silently mouthed chants and
appeared in a trance, while Roald sat facing a wall,
staring at some unseen image. Jimmy shook off distant
images of strange people, oddly dressed and engaged in
alien undertakings, and forced himself alert. "hey,' he
said with just enough authority to jar everyone and turn
their attention to him. 'You all look . . . lost.'
Martin's eyes seemed to focus. "I. . . I was thinking of
Father.'
Arutha spoke softly. "It's this place. I was . . . nearly
without hope, ready to give up.'
Roald said, "I was at Cutter's Gap again, only
Highcastle's army wasn't going to arrive in time.'
Baru said, "I was singing . . . my death chant.'
Laurie crossed to stand next to Jimmy. "It's this place
I was thinking Carline had found another while I was
gone.' He looked at Jimmy. 'You?'
Jimmy shrugged. "It hit me funny, too, but maybe it's
my age or something. It only made me think of strange
people dressed in weird clothing. I don't know. It sort of
makes me angry.'
Martin said, "The elves said the moredhel come here to
dream dreams of power.'
Jimmy said, 'Well, all I know is you looked like those
walking dead.' He moved towards the crevice. "It's dark.
Why don't I go and look about, and if things are quiet,
then we can all go.'
Arutha said, "I think perhaps you and I should go
together.'
'No,' said the boy thief. "I hate to show a lack of
deference, but if I'm to risk my life doing something I'm
expert in, let me do it. You need to have someone crawl
about inside that place, and I'll not have you tagging
after.'
"It's too dangerous,' said Arutha.
'i'll not deny that,' answered Jimmy. 'i'll guarantee
that Dragon Lord shrine will need some skill cracking,
and if you've any sense you'll let me go alone. Otherwise
you'll be dead before I can say, 'Don't step there,
Highness," and we might as well not have bothered in
the first place. We could have just let the Nighthawks
skewer you, and I'd have spent many more comfortable
nights in Krondor. '
Martin said, 'He's right.'
Arutha said, "I don't like this, but you are right.' As
the boy turned to go, he added, 'Have I told you that you
put me in mind of that pirate Amos Trask sometimes?'
In the darkness they could sense the boy's grin.
Jimmy scampered up through the crevice and peered
out. Seeing no one, he made a quick run for the building.
Coming up against the wall, he edged around until he
was before the door. He stood quietly for a moment,
judging the best way to approach the problem. He studied
the door once again, then quickly clambered up the wall,
finding finger- and toeholds in the moulding next to the
door. Again he studied the anteroom through the
window. Double doors opened up into darkness beyond.
Otherwise the room was empty. Jimmy glanced upwards
and was confronted by a blank ceiling. What was waiting
inside to kill him? As sure as dogs had fleas, there was a
trap inside. And if so, what sort and how to get around
it? Again Jimmy was visited by the nagging itch of
something odd about this place.
Jimmy dropped back to the ground and took a deep
breath. He reached out and lifted the latch of the door.
With a shove, he leapt aside, to the left, so the swinging
door, hinged on the right, would shield him from anything
behind it for an instant. Nothing happened.
Jimmy peered cautiously inside, letting his senses seek
out inconsistencies, flaws in the design of the place, any
clue to reveal a trap. He saw none. Jimmy leant against
the door. What if the trap were magic? He had no
defences against some enchantment meant to kill humans,
non-moredhel, anyone wearing green, or whatever it
might be. Jimmy stuck his hand across the portal, ready
to snatch it back. Nothing happened.
Jimmy sat. Then he lay down. From the low angle
everything looked different and he hoped he might see
something. As he rose, something did register. The floor
was made of marble slabs of equal size and texture, with
slight cracks between them. He lightly placed his foot on
the slab before the door, slowly permitting his weight to
fall upon it, feeling for any movement. There was none.
Jimmy entered and moved around towards the far
doors. He inspected every stone slab before he stepped
upon it, and decided none were trapped. He inspected
the walls and ceiling, gauging everything about the room
that might provide him with some intelligence. Nothing.
The old, familiar feeling plagued jimmy: something was
wrong here.
With a sigh, Jimmy faced the open doors into the heart
of the building and entered.

Jimmy had seen many unsavoury characters in his former
occupation, and this Jaccon would have fitted in perfectly.
Jimmy lay flat and rolled the corpse over. As the dead
man's weight landed upon the other stone before the
door, there was a faint snapping sound and something
sped overhead. Jimmy examined Jaccon and found a
small dart stuck in the man's chest near the collarbone.
Jimmy didn't touch it, he didn't have to: he knew it
contained a quick-acting poison. Another item of interest
on the fellow was a beautifully carved dagger with a
jewelled hilt. Jimmy plucked it from the man's belt and
stuck it inside his tunic.
Jimmy sat back upon his heels. He had walked through
a long, blank hall, with no doors, down into a subterranean
level of the building. He judged he stood less
than a hundred yards from the caverns where Arutha and
the others waited. He had stumbled upon the corpse at
the only door leaving the hall. The stone slab directly
beyond the door was ever so slightly depressed.
He rose and stepped through the door, diagonally to
the stone next to the one before the door. The trap was
so obvious it shouted for caution, but this fool, in his
rush towards fabled wealth, had walked into it. And paid
the price.
Something bothered Jimmy. The trap was too obvious
It was as if someone wanted him to feel confident in
defeating it. He shook his head. Whatever tendency
towards incaution he'd had was gone. Now he was fully
professional, a thief who understood that any misstep
would likely be his last.
Jimmy wished for more light than was provided by the
single torch he had brought along. He inspected the floor
below Jaccon and saw another displaced stone. He ran
his hand along the door-jamb and found no trip wire or
other triggering device. Stepping across the threshold,
avoiding the stones before the door, Jimmy passed the
corpse and continued on towards the heart of the building.

It was a circular room. In the centre of it a slender
pedestal rose. Upon the pedestal sat a crystal sphere, lit
from above by some unseen light source. And within the
sphere rested a single branch with silver-green leaves, red
berries, and silver thorns. Jimmy walked cautiously. He
looked everywhere but where the pedestal rested. He
explored every inch of the room he could reach without
entering the pool of light about the sphere, and found
nothing resembling a trap-springing device. But the nagging
at the back of Jimmy's mind, which had been with
him all along, kept shouting that something was wrong
about this place. Since discovering Jaccon, he had avoided
three different traps, all easy enough for any competent
thief to spot. Now here, where he expected the last trap
to be, he found none.
Jimmy sat down on the floor and began to think.

Arutha and the others came alert. Jimmy came scrambling
back down into the crevice, to land with a thud on the
floor of the cave. 'What did you find?' asked Arutha.
"It's a big place. It's got lots of empty rooms, all
cleverly fashioned so that you can only move one way
from the door to the centre of the building and out.
There's nothing in there but some sort of little shrine in
the centre. There're a few traps, simple enough ones to
get around.
"But the whole thing's too off-centre. Something's not
right. The building's a fake.'
'What?' said Arutha.
.Just suppose you wanted to catch you, and you were
worried about you being very clever. Don't you think
you might just add one last catchall in case all the bright
lads you hired to catch you were a mite slow?'
"You think the building's a trap?' said Martin.
"Yes, a big elaborate, clever trap. Look, suppose you
got this mystic lake and all your tribe comes here to
make magic or get power from the dead or whatever it is
the Dark Brothers do up here? you want to add this one
last catchall, so you think like a human. Maybe Dragon
Lords don't build buildings, but humans do, so you build
this building, this big building with nothing in it. Then
you put a sprig of Silverthorn in some place, like in a
shrine inside, and you rig a trap. Someone finds the little
hellos you put along the way, gets around them, thinking
they're being very, very clever, wanders about, finds the
Silverthorn, pulls it, and . . ."
"And the trap springs,' said Laurie, his tone appreciative
of the boy's logic.
'And the trap springs,' said Jimmy. "I don't know how
they did it, but I'll bet the last trap is magic of some sort.
The rest were too easy to find, then, at the end, nothing.
I bet you touch the sphere with the Silverthorn in it and a
dozen doors between you and the outside slam shut, a
hundred of those dead warriors come out of the walls, or
the whole building simply falls on you.'
Arutha said, "I'm not convinced.'
"Look, you've got a greedy pack of bandits up there.
Most of them aren't very smart or they wouldn't be
outlaws living in the mountains. They'd be self-respecting
thieves in a city. Besides being stupid, they're greedy. So
they come up here to earn some gold looking for the
Prince and they're told, "Don't go in the building." Now,
each one of these clever lads thinks the moredhel are
lying, because he knows everyone else is as stupid and
greedy as he is. One of these clever lads goes up there
looking around, and gets a dart in the gullet for his
efforts.
'After I found the sphere on the pedestal, I doubled
back and really looked around. That place was built by
the moredhel, recently. It's about as ancient as I am. It's
mostly a wood building, with stone facing. I've been in
old buildings. This isn't one. I don't know how they did
it. Maybe with magic, or just a whole lot of slave labour,
but it's no more than a few months old.'
'But Galain said this was a Valheru place,' said Arutha.
Martin said, "I think him right, but I think Jimmy right
as well. Remember what you told me of Tomas's rescue
from the Valheru underground hall by Dolgan, just before
the war?' Arutha said he did. 'That place sounds much
like this. '

'Light a torch,' said Arutha. Roald did so, and they
moved away from the crevice.
Laurie said, 'Has anyone noticed that for a cave the
ground is fairly flat?'
'And the walls're pretty regular,' added Roald.
Baru looked about. "In our haste we never examined
this place closely. It is not natural. The boy is right. The
building is a trap.'
Martin said, 'This cave system has had two thousand
years or more to wear away. With that fissure above us,
rain comes through here every winter, as well as seepage
from the lake above. It has worn away most of what was
carved upon the walls.' He ran his hand over what seemed
at first glance to be swirls in the stone. 'But not all.' He
indicated some design on the walls, rendered abstract by
years of erosion.
Baru said, 'And so we dream ancient dreams of
hopelessness.
Jimmy said, 'There are some tunnels we haven't
explored yet. Let's have a look.'
Arutha looked at his companions. "Very well. You take
the lead, Jimmy. Let's backtrack to that cave with all the
tunnels, then you pick a likely one and we'll see where it
leads.'

In the third tunnel they found the stairway leading down.
Following it, they came to a large halway, ancient from
the look of the sediment upon the floor. Regarding it,
Baru said, "No foot has trod this hall in ages.'
Tapping the surface of the floor with his boot, Martin
agreed. 'This is years of buildup.'
Jimmy led them along, under giant vaulted arches from
which hung dust-laden torch holders, long rusted to nearuselessness.
At the far end of the hall they discovered a
chamber. Roald inspected the giant iron hinges, now
grotesquely twisted lumps of rust, barely recognizable,
where once huge doors had hung. 'Whatever wanted to
get through the door that was here didn't seem willing to
wait.'
Passing through the portal, Jimmy halted. 'Look at
this.'
They faced what seemed a large hall, with faint echoes
of ancient grandeur. Tapestries, now little more than
shredded rags with no hint of colour, hung along the
walls. Their torches cast flickering shadows upon the
walls, giving the impression that ancient memories were
awakening after aeons of sleep. What might have once
been any number of recognizable things were now scattered
piles of debris tossed about the hall. Splinters of
wood, a twisted piece of iron, a single gold shard, all
hinted at what might have once been, without revealing
lost truths. The only intact object in the room was a
stone throne atop a raised dais halfway along the righthand
wall. Martin approached and gently touched the
centuries-old stone. 'Once a Valheru sat here. This was
his seat of power.' As if remembering a dream, all in the
hall were visited with a sense of how alien this place was.
Millennia gone, the power of the Dragon Lord was still a
faint presence. There was no mistaking it now: here they
stood in the heart of an ancient race's legacy. This was a
source of the moredhel dreams, one of the places of
power along the Dark Path.
Roald said, "There's not much left. What caused this?
Looters? The Dark Brotherhood?'
Martin looked about, as if seeing ages of history in the
dust upon the walls. "I don't think so. From what I know
of ancient lore, this may have endured from the time of
the Chaos Wars.' He indicated the utter destruction.
'They fought on the backs of dragons. They challenged
the gods, or so legends say. Little that witnessed that
struggle survived. We will probably never know the truth.'
Jimmy had been scampering about the chamber, poking
here and there. At last he returned and said, "Nothing
growing here.'
'Then where is the Silverthorn?' Arutha asked bitterly.
"We have looked everywhere.'

Everyone was silent for a long minute. Finally Jimmy
said, "Not everywhere. We've looked around the lake,
and' - he waved his hand around the hall - 'under the
lake. But we haven't looked in the lake.'
'in the lake?' said Martin.
Jimmy said,"Calin and Galain said it grew very close
to the edge of the water. So, had anyone thought to ask
the elves if there have been heavy rains this year?'
Martin's eyes widened. "The water level's risen!'
"Anyone want to go swimming?' asked Jimmy.

Jimmy pulled his foot back. "it's cold,' he whispered.
Martin said to Baru. 'City boy. He's seven thousand
feet up in the mountains and he's surprised the lake's
cold.'
Martin waded into the water, slowly, so as not to
splash. Baru followed. Jimmy took a deep breath and
followed, wincing every step as the water reached higher.
When he stepped off a ledge, he plunged in up to his
waist and opened his mouth in a silent gasp of pain.
Upon the shore, Laurie winced in sympathy. Arutha and
Roald kept watch for any sign of alarm on the bridge. All
three crouched low, behind the gentle slope down to the
water. The night was quiet, and most of the moredhel
and human renegades slept on the far side of the bridge.
They had decided to wait until the hours just before
dawn. It was likely the guards would be half-asleep if
they were humans, and even moredhel were likely to
make the assumption that nothing would occur just before
sunrise.
Faint sounds of movement in the water were followed
by a gasp as Jimmy ducked his head underwater for the
first time and came right up again. Gulping air, he ducked
back under. Like the others, he worked blind, feeling
along. Suddenly his hand smarted as he stuck himself on
something sharp among the moss-covered rocks. He came
up with what seemed a noisy gasp, but nothing at the
bridge indicated he was heard. Ducking under, he felt
the slimy rocks. He located the thorny plant by sticking
himself again, but he didn't jump up. He took two more
punctures getting a grip on the plant and pulling, but
suddenly it came up. Breaking the surface, he whispered
'i've got something.'
Grinning, he held up a plant that gleamed almost white
in the light of the little moon. It looked like red berries
stuck onto the branches of a rose branch with silver
thorns. Jimmy turned it in appreciation. With a tiny "Ah'
of triumph, he said, 'i've got it.'
Martin and Baru waded over and inspected the plant.
'is this enough?' asked the Hadati.
Arutha said,"The elves never told us. Get some more
if you can, but we wait only a few more minutes.'
Gingerly he wrapped the plant in a cloth and stowed it in
his pack.
In ten minutes they had found three more plants.
Arutha was convinced this was enough and signalled it
was time to return to the cave. Jimmy, Martin, and Baru,
dripping and chilled, hurried to the crevice and entered,
with the others keeping watch.
Inside the cave, Arutha looked a man reborn as he
inspected the plants under the faint light of a small brand
Roald held aloft. Jimmy couldn't keep his teeth from
chattering as he grinned at Martin. Arutha could not take
his eyes from the plant. He marvelled at the odd sensations
that coursed through his body as he regarded the
branches with their silver thorns, red berries, and green
leaves. For beyond the branches, in a place only he could
see, he knew a soft laugh might be heard again, a soft
hand might touch his face, and the embodiment of every
happiness he had known might somehow be his again.
Jimmy looked at Laurie. "Damn me if I don't think
we're going to do it.'
Laurie threw Jimmy his tunic. 'Now all we have to do
is get back down.'
Arutha's head came up. "Dress quickly. We leave
at once.'

As Arutha breasted the rim of the canyon, Galain said, "I
was about to pull the ropes up again. You cut it fine,
Prince Arutha.'
"I thought it best to be down the mountain as soon as
possible, rather than wait another day.'
"That I cannot argue,' agreed the elf. 'Last night there
was some argument between the chief of the renegades
and the moredhel leaders. I couldn't get close enough to
hear, but as the dark ones and humans don't get along
very well, I judge this arrangement soon to end. If that
happens, this Murad may decide to cease waiting and
begin looking once more.'
'Then we had best get as far from here as we can
before light.'
Already the sky was turning grey as false dawn visited
the mountains. Fortune was with them in part, for on this
side of the mountains they would have shadows to hide
within awhile longer than had they faced the sunrise. It
would be only a little help, but any was welcome.
Martin, Baru, and Roald were quickly up the ropes.
Laurie struggled a little, not having the knack of climbing,
a fact he had 'failed to mention to the others. With silent
urging from his companions, he finally cleared the rim.
Jimmy scampered quickly upwards. The morning light
was growing. Jimmy feared being seen against the rock
face of the canyon should anyone move from the bridge.
In his haste, he became incautious and slipped on an
outcropping, the toe of his boot skidding off the rock. He
gripped the rope as he fell a few feet and grunted as he
slammed into the face of the canyon. Then pain exploded
along his side and he bit back a shout. Gasping silently
for breath, he turned his back to the wall of the canyon.
With a spasm of movement he wrapped the rope under
his left arm and gripped it tightly. Gingerly he reached
inside his tunic and felt the knife he had pilfered from the
dead man. When dressing, he had hastily returned it to
his tunic rather than place it in his pack as he should have
done. Now at least two inches of steel stuck in his side.
Keeping his voice in control, he whispered, "Pull me up.'
Jimmy nearly lost his grip with the first wave of pain
that struck as they hauled the rope upwards. He slipped
and gritted his teeth. Then he was over the rim.
'What happened?' asked the Prince.
"I got careless,' answered the boy. "Lift my tunic.'
Laurie did so and swore. Martin nodded at the boy,
who returned the gesture. Then he pulled the knife and
Jimmy almost fainted. Martin cut a section of a cloak and
bound the boy's side. He motioned to Laurie and Roald,
who supported the boy between them as they moved
away from the canyon. As they hurried through the
quickly brightening morning, Laurie said, "You just
couldn't do it the easy way, could you?'

They had managed to avoid detection while carrying
Jimmy, for the first half of the day. The moredhel still
did not know Moraelin had been invaded, and looked
outwards, awaiting the approach of those who now sought
to escape. But now they watched a moredhel lookout. He sat
perched upon the outcropping that had caused so much
trouble getting past before, and under which they must
again pass. It was near noon, and they huddled down
inside a depression, barely out of sight. Martin signalled
to Galain, asking if the elf wanted to move first or second.
The elf moved out, letting Martin follow. The afternoon
was still, the day lacking even the slight breeze that had
covered small movements when they had passed three
nights earlier. Now it took all the skill the elf and Martin
possessed to move a scant twenty feet without alerting
the sentry. Martin nocked an arrow and took aim over Galain's
shoulder. Galain pulled his hunting knife and rose uP
beside the moredhel. Galain tapped him on the shoulder.
The dark elf spun at the unexpected contact, and Galain
slashed his knife across his throat. The moredhel reared
up and Martin's arrow took him in the chest. Galain
grabbed him about the knees, lowering him back to his
sitting position. He twisted Martin's arrow, breaking it
off rather than trying to pull out the barb. In only
moments the moredhel had been killed and still seemed
at his post.
Martin and Galain ducked back down and faced the
others. "He'll be discovered in a few hours. They may
think us on our way in and search above us first, but then
they'll be down the mountain. Now we must fly. We're
two days to the outer reaches of the elver forests if we
don't stop. Come.'
They scrambled down the trail, Jimmy wincing as he
was half carried by Laurie. 'if the horses are still there,'
muttered Roald.
.if they're not,' said Jimmy weakly, 'at least it's all
downhill. '

They stopped only to let the horses get the minimal rest
they required to survive a cross-country run. It would be
'likely the animals would not be usable after the dash, but
that could not be helped. Arutha would let nothing
prevent his return now that he possessed the means for
Anita's cure. Before, he had been a man on the edge of
despair, now a flame burned within, and he would let
nothing extinguish it.

Through the night they rode.
Lathered, panting horses were led by exhausted riders
down the woodland trail. They had entered deep forest,
still in the foothills of the mountains, but close to the
boundary of the elver forests. Jimmy was half-conscious
.from loss of blood, fatigue, and pain. The wound had
'opened again sometime during the night and he had been
unable to do more than clutch his side. Then the boy's
eyes rolled up and he fell face' down onto the trail.
When he regained consciousness, he sat up, held by
Laurie and Baru while Martin and Roald wrapped him in
fresh bandages cut from Martin's cloak. 'This'll have to
do until we reach Elvandar,' said Martin.
Arutha said, 'if it opens again, say something. Galain,
ride double with him, and don't let him fall off.'
Once again they were in the saddle, and once again
they endured the nightmare ride.

Near sundown of the second day, the first horse faltered.
Martin put it down quickly and said, 'i'll run for a while.'
For nearly three miles the Duke ran, though the
fatigued horses' pace was slower than normal, this was
still an impressive feat. Baru took to the trail for a while,
then Galain, but still they were reaching their limit. The
horses were reduced to a loping canter and trotting. Then
they could only walk.
In silence they moved through the night, simply counting
the passing yards as each minute took them closer
to safety, knowing that, somewhere behind, the mute
moredhel captain and his Black Slayers followed. Near
morning they crossed a' small trail and Martin said, 'Here
they must split forces, for they can't know we haven't
turned east for Stone Mountain.'
Arutha said, "Everyone dismount.'
They did and the Prince said, 'Martin, lead the horses
towards Stone Mountain for a while, then turn them
loose. We'll continue on foot.'
Martin did as he was bidden while Baru masked the
tracks of those on foot. Martin caught up with them an
our later. As he ran down a woodland trail towards
them, he said, "I think I heard something behind. I can't
be sure. The wind is picking up and the noise was faint.'
Arutha said, 'We continue towards Elvandar, but keep

alert for a defensible position.' He started a staggerlegged
run, and the others took off after him, Jimmy
supported in part by Martin.
For nearly an hour they half ran, half stumbled along,
until the sounds of pursuit could be heard echoing through
the woods. They felt a surge of energy as fear drove them
onwards. Then Arutha pointed towards an outcropping
of rock, in a semicircle that formed an almost perfect
natural breastwork. He asked Galain, 'How far until
help?'
The elf studied the woods in the early morning light
and said, "We are near the edge of our forests. My people
will be an hour away, perhaps two.'
Arutha quickly gave the elf the pack containing the
Silverthorn and said, 'Take Jimmy. We'll hold them here
until you return.' They all knew the pack was against the
possibility the elf didn't return in time. At least Anita
could still be cured.
Jimmy sat down on the rock. 'Don't be ridiculous. I
would double the time he'll take to find help. I can fight
standing still better than I can run.' With that he crawled
over the stone breastwork and pulled out his dirk.
Arutha looked at the boy: tired, bleeding again, almost
collapsing from fatigue and blood loss, but grinning at
him while holding his dirk. Arutha gave a curt nod and
the elf was off. Quickly they got behind the rocks, drew
weapons, and waited.

For long minutes they huddled down behind the rocks,
knowing that as each minute Passed, their chances of
rescue increased. Almost with each breath they could
feel rescue and obliteration racing towards them. Chance
as much as anything would determine their survival. If
Calin and his warriors were waiting close to the edge of
the forest, and Galain could quickly locate them, there
was hope, if not, no hope. In the distance the sound of
riders grew louder. Each moment passed slowly, each
instant of possible discovery dragging by, and the agony
of waiting increased. Then, in almost welcome relief, a
shout was sounded and the moredhel were upon them.
Martin rose up, his bow already drawn by the time he
had a target. The first moredhel to see them was propelled
backwards out of his saddle by the force of the arrow
taking him in the chest. Arutha and the others made
ready. A dozen moredhel riders milled about, startled at
the sudden bow fire. Before they could react, Martin had
another down. Three turned and rode away, but the
others charged.
The outcropping reared up and spread out, making it
impossible for the moredhel to overwelm them, but they
came at full gallop anyway, their horses' hooves making
dull thunder upon the still-damp ground. Though they
rode close to the necks of their horses, two more were
taken by Martin's bow 'before they reached the stone
redoubt. Then the moredhel were upon them. Baru leapt
atop the rocks, his long sword a blur as he sliced through
the air. A moredhel fell, his arm severed from his body.
Arutha ran up and jumped from the rocks, dragging a
Dark Brother from the saddle. The moredhel died under
his knife. He spun in place, his rapier coming from its
sheath as another rider charged. The Prince stood his
ground until the last, then with a sideways leap and a
slash unseated the rider. A quick thrust, and the moredhel
died.
Roald pulled one from his saddle and they both slid
down into the protection of the rocks. Jimmy waited as
they rolled about, then, when he saw an opening, another
Dark Brother died as the boy used his dirk.
The two remaining saw Laurie and Martin ready, and
chose to retreat. Both died as Martin's bow sang in the
morning light. As soon as they were out of the saddle,
Martin was over the rocks. He quickly scavenged the
bodies and returned with a short bow and two quivers of
arrows. 'i'm almost out,' he said, indicating his depleted
quiver. "These are no cloth-yard shafts, but I can use this
little horse bow if I need.'
Arutha looked about. 'There'll be more along soon.'
"Do we run?' asked Jimmy.
'No. We would only gain a little, and we might not find
a place nearly as defensible. We wait.'
Minutes passed and all waited with eyes turned towards
the trail they knew the moredhel would use to attack
them. Laurie whispered, 'Run, Galain, run.'
For what seemed an eternity the woods were silent.
Then in clouds of dust, with hooves pounding the ground,
horsemen came into view.
The giant mute, Murad, rode in the van, a dozen
Black Slayers behind him. Other moredhel and human
renegades followed. Murad reined in, signalling for the
others to halt.
Jimmy groaned. 'There's a hundred of them.'
Roald said, "Not a hundred, more like thirty.'
Laurie said, 'That's enough.'
Arutha looked over the rock, saying, "We may be able
to hold for a few minutes.' They all knew it was hopeless.
Then Baru stood. And before anyone could prevent
him, he started shouting at the moredhel, in a language
unknown to Jimmy, the Prince, and Martin. Laurie and
Roald shook their heads.
Arutha began to reach for the hillman, but Laurie said,
cDon't. He's challenging Murad to personal combat. A
matter of honour.'
'Will he accept?'
Roald shrugged. 'They're a funny lot. I've fought the
Dark Brothers before. Some of them are cut-throat
renegades. But most are caught up in honour and ritual
and the like. Depends on where you find them. If that
lot's a gang of moss-troopers from north Yabon, they'll
simply attack. But if Murad's got a band of old-fashioned
deepforest Dark Brothers under his command, they may
not take kindly to him saying no. If he's trying to show
some magic powers are backing him, he can't rightly
refuse and keep their loyalty. But mostly it depends on
what Murad thinks about matters of honour.'
'Whatever's the outcome, Baru's thrown them into
confusion,' observed Martin.
Arutha could see the moredhel standing about while
the mute stared impassively at Baru. Then Murad waved
his hand towards baru and the others. A moredhel in a
cloak rode forward, turning his horse to face Murad, and
said something in a questioning tone.
The mute motioned again, and the moredhel who
confronted him waved the other away. The moredhel
riders, except for those wearing black armour, retreated
their mounts several yards. One of the humans rode up
and turned his horse to face Murad. He shouted something
at the moredhel leader, several other humans
behind echoing the tones.
'Martin,' said Arutha, 'can you make out what's being
said?'
'No. But whatever it is, it isn't flattering, that's for
certain.'
Suddenly Murad drew his own sword and struck the
offending human. Another human shouted something
and seemed ready to ride forward, but two moredhel
rode to intercept him. With a sullen expression the first
brigand turned his horse and rode back to join the other
humans.
Murad again gestured towards the humans, and charged
his horse.
Baru leapt from the rocks and ran a short way forward
to take up position. He stood his ground, his sword
drawn back to strike. As the horse was almost upon him,

Baru lashed out with a circling step that took him from
harm's way, and the horse nickered in pain as it stumbled.
The wounded animal went down. Murad, despite his
bulk, rolled from the falling animal and came up, sword
still in hand. He was quick and turned in time to meet
Baru's attack. The two combatants clashed, steel ringing
on steel.
Arutha looked about. The dozen Black Slayers waited
quietly, though for how long Arutha did not know. With
Murad involved in a matter of honour, they might wait
until the issue was decided. The Prince fervently hoped
so.
All eyes watched. Martin said, 'Don't let down your
guard. As soon as this is over, either way, they'll hit us
again.'
'At least I can catch my breath,' said Jimmy.
Arutha surveyed the area. Twenty more moredhel were
approaching the area. All Baru did was buy them time.
Murad struck out and was struck in return. Within
minutes both combatants were a mass of bleeding
wounds, testimony to how each was able almost to deliver
a death blow, but not quite. Cut and parry, lunge and
riposte, slash and dodge, the struggle went on. The
Hadati was equal in height to the moredhel, but the dark
elf bulked larger. With a series of overhead, clubbing
blows, Murad began to drive Baru back.
Martin brought his sword to the ready. "Baru's tiring.
it'll be over soon.'
But like a dancer timing his moves to the music, Baru
let Murad fall into a pattern. Up and down the sword
rose and fell, then, when it was rising, Baru ceased his
retreat, instead stepping forward and to the side. With a
sweeping cut, he sliced Murad's ribs. It was a deep cut
that bled fiercely.
'That's a surprise,' Martin said calmly.
"Damn fine move,' said Roald in professional
appreciation.
But Murad didn't let the surprising blow finish him. He
turned in place and grabbed the Hadati's sword arm.
Murad was off balance, but he pulled Baru down with
him. They grappled and rolled down the hill towards the
rocks where Arutha stood. Weapons slipped from bloodwet
fingers and the two combatants struck at each other
with fists.
Then they were up again, but Murad had his arms
about Baru's waist. Hoisting the Hadati into the air, the
moredhel placed interlocked hands in the small of Baru's
back, squeezing to break his spine. Baru's head went
back as he cried out in pain. Then he brought his hands
together in a thunderous slap over the moredhel's ears,
rupturing his eardrums.
Murad gave a warbling, gurgling cry of pain as he
dropped Baru. The creature covered his ears with his
hands, blinded by pain for a moment. Baru reared back
and struck the moredhel in the face with his fist, a
staggering blow that pulped Murad's nose, broke some
teeth, and split his lip.
Again Baru struck him in the face, jerking his head
back, and again. The Hadati seemed on the verge of
clubbing the moredhel to death. But Murad gripped
Baru's wrist and pulled him down, and again they rolled
upon the ground.
Then Murad was atop Baru, and each had his hands
around the other's neck. With grunts of pain and exertion,
the two began choking each other.
Jimmy reached down and took a dagger from the body
of the dead moredhel at his feet, to supplement his dirk.
Martin said, 'Soon. Soon.'
Murad bore down with all his weight, his face turning
red, as did Baru's. Neither could breathe, and it was only
a question of who succumbed first. Baru bore the bulk of

the moredhel atop him, but Murad had a deep wound in
his side, which still bled, weakening him as every second
passed.
Then, with a grunt and sigh, Murad fell forwards onto
Baru. There was silence in the woods for a long moment
before Murad moved. With a roll he fell over, off Baru.
The Hadati slowly rose. Taking a knife from the moredhel's
 own belt, he slowly cut Murad's throat. Sitting
back upon his heels, Baru breathed deeply. Then, with
deliberate contempt for his own danger, he plunged his
knife deep into Murad's chest.
cWhat's he doing?' asked Roald.
Martin said, "Remember what Tatham said about the
Black Slayers. He's cutting Murad's heart out, just in
case he might try to rise again.'
More moredhel and renegades had joined the company
overlooking the combat, and now more than fifty riders
watched the Hadati butcher the moredhel chieftain. The
Hadati cut down into the chest, then his hand plunged
deep within the wound and with a single jerk he pulled
Murad's heart free. Holding his hand up, so that all might
see, he showed the assembled moredhel and humans that
Murad's heart beat no longer. Then he tossed it aside
and rose drunkenly to his feet.
With a staggering, wobbling run, he tried for the rocks,
only ten yards away. A moredhel rider moved to strike
him from the side, and Jimmy threw his dagger. The
point took the creature in the eye, causing him to scream
as he fell back out of the saddle. But another came at
Baru and cut at him. The sword took him in the side, and
the Hadati fell forward.
'Damn you!' shouted Jimmy, near tears. 'He won. You
could have let him come back!' He threw his dirk, but
the other rider dodged. The moredhel who had struck
Baru stiffened and turned, and Arutha and his companions
saw an arrow in his back. Another moredhel
shouted something as he put away his bow. This brought
an angry shout from a third and one of the humans.
"What is all this?' asked Arutha.

Roald said, 'The one who killed BAru is a renegade: no
honour. That fellow on the horse seems to have had the
same opinion as Jimmy. The Hadati won, he should have
been allowed to return to die with his companions. Now
the slayer, another renegade, and the human bandits are
all shouting at one another. We might gain a little time,
or at least have some of them quit, now that their big
chieftain is dead.'
Then the Black Slayers charged.
Martin reared up and began firing. The archer's speed
was phenomenal, and three riders were unhorsed before
they reached the rock abutment.
Steel clashed upon steel and the battle was joined.
Roald leapt atop the rock, as had Baru before, and his
sword also struck out at all who came within his reach.
No moredhel could ride in close enough to strike him
with their short swords, while his broadsword delivered
death to whoever rode within reach.
Arutha parried a blow aimed at Laurie, then struck
upwards from a crouch to take a rider. Roald leapt and
dragged one from the saddle and clubbed him with the
hilt of his sword. Seven moredhel died before the others
withdrew.
Arutha said, 'They didn't all charge.'
The others could see that some of the moredhel had
held back, and others were still arguing, along with two
human renegades. A few of the Black Slayers were still
mounted, and they were ignoring what transpired with
their companions, forming for another charge.
Jimmy liberated another dagger from a moredhel just
at the edge of the rocks, then noticed something. He
tugged at Martin's sleeve. "See that ugly-looking fellow
with the fancy red breastplate and all those gold rings
and things?'
Martin saw such a one sitting at the head of the human
riders. 'Yes.'
'Can you kill him now?'
"It's a difficult shot. Why?'
'Because as sure as there's elves in the woods, that's
Reitz. He's captain of that band of outlaws. You knock
him off and the others will most likely run away, or at
least keep holding back until a new captain's elected.'
Martin rose up, took aim, and let fly. The shaft sped
between the boles of the trees and took the indicated
rider in the throat. With a snap his head came up and he
somersaulted backwards out of his saddle.
'Amazing, said Jimmy.
Martin said, 'I had to clear the top of that breastplate.'
Laurie said dryly, 'Not very sporting, shooting without
warning.'
'You may convey my apologies,' said Martin. 'I forgot
you singers always have the heroes acting that way in
your sagas.'
'if we're the heroes,' said Jimmy, 'the outlaws should
run away.'
True to Jimmy's prediction, the human renegades
began muttering among themselves, and were suddenly
riding away. One moredhel shouted after them angrily,
then waved another attack upon the Prince's party.
Another moredhel spat on the ground before the 'first
and turned his horse, motioning some companions away
as well. Twenty or so rode after the humans.~
Arutha counted. cFewer than twenty this time, and the
Slayers.'
The riders dismounted, including those who had held
back during the previous attack. They had discovered
they couldn't close in to the 'rocks while on horseback.
They ran close, using the trees as cover and fanned out,
to surround Arutha's position.
Roald said, 'This is what they should have done the first time. '
"They're a little slow, but not entirely stupid,' commented
Laurie.
Jimmy clutched his dagger as the Dark Brothers
charged. 'i'd have preferred stupidity.'
The moredhel came in a wave, and suddenly there was
fighting on all sides. Jimmy leapt away as a sword came
crashing down from above. He thrust upwards with his
dagger and took the moredhel in the stomach.
Roald and Laurie battled, back to back, surrounded by
Dark Brothers. Martin shot until he was out of arrows,
when he grabbed up the moredhel bow and arrows. His
firing was rapid and accurate and a dozen more Dark
Brothers were struck before he dropped the bow and
pulled his sword.
Arutha fought like a man possessed, his rapier delivering
injury at every quarter. No moredhel could get close
and remain free of wounds. But the Prince knew time
would eventually win. The defenders would fatigue and
slow and then they would die.
Arutha could feel the strength drain from his arms as
the certainty of death came to him. There was little point
in hoping. There were more than twenty moredhel still
standing, and they were but five.
Martin hewed with his sword, cutting all who came
before him. Roald and Laurie lunged and parried, giving
up only inches, but slowly being worn down by the
attackers.
A moredhel leapt over the stone breastwork and spun
to face Jimmy. Jimmy acted without hesitation, his stiff
side slowing him only slightly. He lashed out and sliced
the moredhel's hand, causing it to drop its sword. The
Dark Brother yanked its belt knife loose as Jimmy slashed
again. But the moredhel leapt back, avoiding the boy's
cut. Then it closed and was upon Jimmy. The boy slashed
wildly, losing his balance and his knife, and the moredhel
was atop him. A knife blade came rushing towards the
boy's face, but he dodged and it struck rock. Jimmy
gripped at the creature's wrist, holding the blade away.
The blade came towards his face, for the weakened boy
could not hold back the moredhel's superior strength.
Then the moredhel's head snapped backwards and
Jimmy could see a knife drawn across the dark elfs
throat, leaving a bloody track. The moredhel was pulled
off by the hand gripping his hair, then the hand was
extended to Jimmy.
Galain stood over the boy and helped him to his feet.
Stunned, Jimmy looked about. Hunting horns sounded in
the forests and the air was filled with arrows. The moredbel
retreated before the attacking elves.
Martin and Arutha dropped their weapons, slumping
in exhaustion. Roald and Laurie collapsed where they
stood. Calin ran towards them, directing his elver warriors
in pursuit.
Arutha looked up, relief bringing tears unbidden to his
eyes. In a hoarse voice he said, 'is it over?'
Calin said, 'It is, Arutha. For a while. They'll be back,
but by then we will all be safely within the boundary of
our forests. Unless they plan invasion, the moredhel will
not cross that border. Our magic is still too strong there.'
An elf leant over the body of Baru. 'Calin. this one
still lives!'
Martin lay back on the rocks, panting. 'That Hadati iS
tough.'
Arutha waved away Galain's hand as he stood, his legs
feeling like water. 'How far?'
'Less than a mile. We need only to cross a small
stream, and we are in our forests.'
Slowly the survivors of the attack felt a lifting of their
hopelessness, for they knew their chances now were
excellent. With the elver escort, it would be unlikely the
moredhel would muster enough strength to overwhelm
them, even should they mount another attack. And with
Murad dead, it was likely their leadership would crumble.
From the behaviour of many of the Dark Brothers it was
clear he had been of major importance to them. His
death would surely weaken Murmandamus's plans for
some time.
Jimmy hugged himself, wondering at the chill he felt,
for suddenly he was returned to the moment he stood in
the cave at Moraelin. He felt the strange dislocation in
time, and knew where he had experienced that chill
before - twice before, in the palace and in the cellar of
the House of Willows. He felt the hair on the back of his
neck stand on end and knew with dread certainty that
some magic was being visited upon them. He leapt away
from the rock and looked about the glade. Pointing, he
shouted, "Then we'd better start now. look!'
The body of a Black Slayer began to move.
Martin said, cCan we cut their hearts out?'
'Too late,' cried Laurie. 'They're armoured, and we
should have acted at once.'
A dozen Black Slayers were slowly rising and turning
to face Arutha's party, weapons in hand. With tentative
steps they began to advance upon the Prince. Calin
shouted orders and elves grabbed up the near-exhausted
and wounded men. Two carried Baru between them, and
they started to run.
The dead warriors staggered after, their wounds still
bleeding, and as they moved, their movements smoothed
out, as if some agency was perfecting its control over
them.
With increasing speed the undead followed. Elver
bowmen ran, halted, turned, and fired, to no effect. The
shafts struck the dead moredhel and would rock them,
knocking a few to the ground, but they would only rise
again.
Jimmy looked back, and somehow the view of these
creatures running through the bright morning light in the
lovely forests was far more horrible than anything he had
seen at the palace or in the sewers of Krondor. Their
movements were surprisingly smooth as they ran after,
weapons at the ready.
Those elves carrying the injured and fatigued humans
kept running while Calin ordered others to slow the
moredhel. Elver warriors drew swords and engaged the
undead creatures, after a few parries, they would retreat.
The rear guard slowed the Black Slayers, but they could
not be halted.
The elves worked themselves into a pattern. They
would turn, fight, retreat a little, fight again, then flee.
But the inability to visit harm on their foes served only to
delay these, not to end their threat. Panting, fatigueQ
elves laboured to halt an inexorable flood. After several
minutes the humans were being half carried, half dragged
across a small stream.
Calin said, 'We enter our forests. Here we will stand.'
The elves drew swords and waited. Arutha, Martin,
Laurie, and Roald readied weapons and waited. The first
moredhel entered the water, sword in hand, splashing
towards them. He reached the shore as an elf made ready
tO Strike, but the moment the undead creature placed his
foot upon the shore, it seemed to sense something behind
the elves. The elf struck it to no effect, but the dead
Black Slayer staggered back, raising its hands, as if
seeking protection.
Suddenly a rider sped past the defenders, a figure
resplendent in white and gold. Upon the back of a white
elf steed, a legendary mystic horse of Elvandar, Tomas
charged the moredhel. The elf steed reared, and Tomas
leapt down from its back and, with a golden arc of his
sword, nearly split the Black Slayer in twain.
Like a raSing flame incarnate, Tomas sped along the
shore, visiting destruction upon each Black Slayer as they
set foot across the stream. Despite their arcane origin,
each was helpless before the combined might of his arm
and Valheru power. Several managed single blows, which
he easily turned aside, answering with terrible swiftness.
His golden sword lashed out and black armour was
cracked as if little more than brittle hide. But none of the
undead sought to flee. each came on, and each was
quickly dispatched. Of those with Arutha, only Martin
alone had seen Tomas in battle before, and even he had
never seen such a display. Soon it was over, and only
Tomas stood upon the edge of the stream. Then came
the sound of more horses. Arutha looked behind and saw
more elf steeds approaching, ridden by Tathar and the
other Spellweavers.
Tathar said, 'Greetings, Prince of Krondor.'
Arutha looked up and smiled weakly. "Thanks to you
all.'
Tomas resheathed his sword and said, 'i could not
travel with you, but once these dared cross the boundaries
of our forest, I could act. Elvandar is mine to preserve.
Any who dares invade will be treated as these.' To Calin
he said, 'Build a funeral pyre. Those black demons shall
never rise again.' And he said to the others, 'When it is
done, we shall return to Elvandar.'
Jimmy fell back upon the grass of the stream bank, his
body too sore and tired to move. Within moments he was
asleep.
They feasted the next night. Queen Aglaranna and
Prince Tomas hosted Arutha and his companions. Galain
approached where Martin and Arutha sat and said, 'Baru
will live. Our healer says he's the toughest human he's
seen.'
'How long before he's up again?' asked Arutha.
'A long time,' said Galain. 'You'll have to leave him
with us. By rights he should have died an hour before we
got here. He's lost a lot of blood, and some of those cuts
are severe. Murad almost crushed his spine and his
windpipe.'
'But other than that, he'll be as good as new,' said
Roald across the table.
Laurie said, cWhen I get home to Carline, I promise
never to leave again.'
Jimmy came to sit next to the Prince. "You look
thoughtful for one who's pulled off the in possible. I'd
thought you'd be happy.'
Arutha ventured a smile. 'I won't be until Anita is
cured.'
'When do we ride home?'
'We go to Crydee in the morning, the elves will escort
us there. Then we take ship to Krondor. We should be
back in time for the Festival of Banapis. If Murmandamus
can't find me with his magic, a ship should be safe
enough. Unless you'd prefer riding back the way we
came?'
Jimmy said, 'Not likely. There might still be more of
those Black Slayers about. I'll take drowning over another
run-in with them, anytime.'
Martin said, 'It will be good to see Crydee again. I'll
have much to see to, getting my house in order. Old
Samuel will be at wits' end with the estate management,
though I'm sure the Baron Bellamy has done well enough
running things in my absence. But there will be much to
do before we leave.'
'Leave for where?' said Arutha.
In an innocent tone Martin said, 'Why for Krondor, of
course.' But his gaze travelled northwards, and silently
he echoed his brother's thoughts. Up there was Murmandamas,
and a battle yet unjoined. The issue was not
decided, only the first skirmish. With the death of Murad
the forces of the Darkness had lost a captain, had been
pushed back, retiring in disorder, but they were not
vanquished, and they would return, if not tomorrow,
then some other day.
Arutha said, 'Jimmy, you have acted with wit and
bravery beyond what is required of a squire. What reward
shall you have?'
Biting a large rib of elk, the boy replied, 'Well, you
still need a Duke of Krondor.'

19.

Continuation

The riders reined in.
Staring upwards, they studied the mountaintops that
marked the boundary of their lands, the great peaks of
the High Wall. For two weeks twelve riders had picked
their way through the mountains, until they had journeyed
beyond the normal limits of Tsurani patrols, above
the timberline. They moved slowly through a pass it had
taken days to locate. They were seeking something no
Tsurani had searched for in ages, a way through the High
Wall into the northern tundra.
It was cold in the mountains, an alien experience for
most of the riders, except those who had served on
Midkemia during the years of the Riftwar. To the younger
soldiers of the Shinzawai Household Guard, this cold was
a strange and almost frightening thing. But they showed
no sign of their discomfort, except to absently draw their
cloaks more tightly about their shoulders as they studied
the odd whiteness on the peaks, hundreds of feet yet
above their heads. They were Tsurani.
Pug, still in the black robes of a Great One, turned to
his companion. 'A short way from here, I think, Hokanu.'
The young officer nodded and signalled his patrol
forward. For weeks the younger son of the Lord of the
Shinzawai had led this escort beyond the limits of the
Empire's northern borders. Following the river Gagajin
to its highest source, a nameless lake in the mountains,
the hand-picked warriors had passed the trails followed
by patrols of the Empire of Tsuranuanni. Here were the
wild, rock-strewn, seemingly desolate lands between the
Empire and the tundra of the north, home of the ThUn
nomads. Even with a Great One in attendance, Hokanu
felt vulnerable. Should a Thun tribe be migrating nearby
when they came out of the mountains, there would be a
score or more of their young warriors running as flankers,
seeking any excuse to take a Tsurani head as a trophy.
They rounded a bend in the trail and a narrow gap in
the mountains provided a glimpse of the lands beyond.
For the first time they could see the vast expanse of the
tundra. Vaguely perceived in the distance, a long, low
white barrier could be made out. cWhat is that?' said
pug.
Hokanu shrugged, his face an implacable Tsurani mask.
'I do not know, Great One. I suspect it is another range
of mountains, across the tundra. Or perhaps it is that
thing you described, the wall of ice.'
'A glacier.'
Hokanu said, 'Whatever, it lies to the north, where
you said the Watchers may be.'
Pug looked behind him at the ten silent riders. Then he
. asked, 'How far?'
Hokanu laughed. 'Farther than we can ride in another
month without starving. We shall have to stop to hunt.'
'I doubt there is a great deal of game about.'
'More than one would think, Great One. The Thun
struggle to reach their traditional southern ranges every
winter, the lands we have held for over a thousand years,
but they still somehow survive the winters here. Those of
us who have wintered on your world know how to forage
in snow country. There will be creatures like your rabbits
and deer once we drop back down below the timberline.
We shall survive.'
Pug weighed his choices. After a moment of silent
consideration he said, "I don't think so, Hokanu. You
may be right, but if what I hope to find is only a legend,
then we shall have all come for no good reason. I may
return to your father's home by my arts, and I could
manage to take a few of you with me, three or even four,
but the rest? No, I think it is time for a parting.'
Hokanu began to object, for his father had ordered
him to protect Pug, but Pug wore the black robe. "Your
will, Great One.' He signalled to his men. "Pass up half
your food.' He said to Pug, 'There will be enough here to
keep you fed for a few more days if you eat sparingly,
Great One.' When the food had been gathered in two
large travel bags and hung behind Pug's saddle, Hokanu
motioned his men to wait.
The magician and the officer rode forward a short way,
and the son of the Shinzawai said, "Great One, I have
given thought to the warning You bring and your quest.'
He seemed to find it difficult to speak his mind. 'You
have brought much into my family's life, not all of it
good, but like my father, I've always believed you .to be a
man of honour, one without guile. If you believe this
legendary Enemy to be the cause behind all the troubles
on your homeworld you have spoken of, and if you think
it about to find your world and ours, I must also believe.
I admit to fear, Great One. I am ashamed.'
Pug shook his head. "There is no shame, Hokanu. The
Enemy is something beyond any of our understanding. I
know you think it a thing of legend, something spoken of
when you were a small boy and your teachers began to
instruct you in the history of the Empire. Even I, who
have seen it in mystic vision, even I do not fathom it,
save to count it the greatest threat to our worlds imaginable.
No, Hokanu, there is no shame. I fear its coming. I
fear its power, and its madness, for it is a thing mindless
in rage and hate. I doubt the sanity of any who did not
fear it.'
Hokanu lowered his head in agreement, then looked
the magician in the eyes. 'Milamber . . . Pug. I thank you
for the ease you brought to my father.' He spoke of the
message Pug had carried from Kasumi. "May the gods of
both worlds watch over you, Great One.' He bowed his
head as a sign of respect and then silently turned his
mount around.
In a short while Pug sat alone atop the pass through
which no Tsurani had ridden in ages. Below him lay the
forests of the north slope of the High Wall, and beyond
them the ranges of the Thun.
And beyond the tundra? A dream or legend perhaps. The alien creatures seen briefly
in a vision each magician endured as he passed his final
testing for the black robe. Those creatures known only as
the Watchers. It was Pug's hope they possessed some
knowledge of the Enemy, some knowledge that might
prove the difference in the coming battle. For as Pug sat
atop his tired mount, on the wind-swept heights of the
greatest mountains on Kelewan's largest continent, he
was certain some great struggle had begun, a struggle
that could mean the destruction of two worlds.
Pug urged his horse forward, and the animal began
moving downwards, towards the tundra and the unknown.

Pug pulled back on the reins. Since leaving Hokanu's
patrol he had seen nothing in the hills as he rode down
towards the tundra. Now, a day out of the foothills, a
'band of Thun were speeding to meet him. The centaurlike
creatures hooted their battle songs as they ran,
their powerful hooves beating the tundra in rhythmic
concussion. But unlike the legendary centaur, the upper
portion of this creature looked as if some form of lizard
had grown to man shape above the torso of a heavy horse
or mule. Like all other native life forms on Kelewan,
they were hexspedal, and as with the other intelligent
native race, the insectoid cho-ja, the upper limbs had
developed into arms. Unlike humans, they had six fingers.
Pug waited quietly until the Thun were almost upon
him, then he erected a mystic barrier and watched as
they crashed into it. The Thun were all large, warrior
males, though Pug couldn't really imagine what a female
of the species must look like. Still, these creatures, for all
their alien appearance, acted as Pug would have expected
young human warriors to act under the same circumstance,
confused and angry. Several beat ineffectively
against the barrier while the others retreated a short way
off to observe. Then Pug removed the cape the Shinzawai
lord had given him for the journey. Through the haze of
the mystic barrier, one of the young Thun saw him
wearing the black robe and shouted to his companions.
They turned and fled.
For three days they followed him at a respectful distance.
Some ran off, and for a time those remaining were
joined by other Thun. This leaving and returning, with
some Thun always behind him, continued unabated. At
night, Pug erected a circle of protection about himself
and his mount, and when he awoke the next morning,
the Thun still watched. Then, on the fourth day, the
Thun finally made peaceful contact.
A single Thun trotted towards him, awkwardly holding
his hands above his head, palms together in the Tsurani
parley sign. Pug could see as he came up to him that they
had sent an elder.
'Honours to your tribe,' said Pug, hoping the creature
could speak Tsurani.
An almost human chuckle answered. "A first that is,
black one. Never honour have man given to me.' The
speech was heavily accented, but understandable, and
the strange, saurian features were surprisingly expressive.
The Thun was unarmed, but old scars showed it had once
been a powerful warrior. Now age had robbed it of much
of its vigour.
Pug expressed a suspicion. 'You are the sacrifice?'
'My life is yours to take. Bring down your sky fire, if
that is your wish. But not, I think, your wish.' Again the
chuckle. "Black ones the Thun have faced. And why a
one near the age of leaving should you take, when sky
fire can a whole band burn? No, you move for Purposes
your own, do you not? Troubling those soon left to face
the ice hunters, the pack killers, a purpose of yours is
not.' Pug studied the Thun. He was almost at the day
when he would be too old to keep pace with the moving
band, when the tribe would abandon him to the predators
of the tundra.
'Your age brings wisdom. I have no contention with
the Thun. I simply seek to pass to the north.'
'Thun a Tsurani word. We are Lasura, the people.
Black ones have I seen. You a troublesome lot. Fight
almost won, then black ones sky fire bring. Tsurani fight
bravely, and Tsurani head a great trophy is, but black
'ones? Leaving Lasura in peace, your business'usually is
not. Why our ranges seek you to cross?'
'There is a grave danger, from ages long gone. It is a
danger to all on Kelewan, to Thun as well as Tsurani. I
think there are those who may know how that danger
may be met, those who live high in the ice.' He pointed
to the north.
The old warrior reared up, like a startled horse, and
Pug's own mount shied away. "Then, mad black one,
northwards go. Death waits there. Find that out you
shall. Those who in the ice live none welcome, and the
Lasura no contest with madmen seek. Those who do a
mad one harm are by the gods harm done. Touched by
the gods you are.' He dashed off.
Pug felt both relief and fear. For the Thun to know
'those who live in the ice' showed there was a chance the
Watchers were neither fiction nor long vanished into the
past. But the Thun's warning caused him to fear for his
mission. What waited for him high in the ice of the north?
Pug moved away as the Thun band vanished over the
horizon. Winds blew down off the ice, and he pulled his
cloak about him. Never had he felt this alone.

More weeks had passed, and the horse had died. It was
not the first time Pug had subsisted on horsemeat. Pug
used his arts to transport' himself short distances, but
mostly he walked. Vagueness about time disturbed him
more than any danger. He had no sense of the Enemy's
imminent attack. For all he knew, the Enemy might need
years to actually enter Midkemia. Whatever else, he
knew it couldn't still possess the power it displayed in the
vision of the time of the golden bridge , otherwise it would
have swept into Midkemia and no power on the planet
could have stopped it.
Pug's routine became dully monotonous as he continued
northwards. He would walk until he topped some
slight rise and would fix his vision on a distant point.
With concentration, he could transport himself there, but
it was tiring and a little dangerous. Fatigue dulled the
mind, and any mistake in the spell used to gather the
energy needed to move him could cause him harm, or
even kill him. So he would walk, until he felt sufficiently
alert and at a place conducive to such spell casting.
Then one day he had seen something strange in the
distance. An odd feature seemed to rear up above the icy
cliff. It appeared vague, too far away to be seen clearly
He sat down. There was a spell of far seeing, one used by
magicians of the Lesser Path. He remembered it as if he
had read it a moment before, a faculty of his mind
that had somehow been enhanced by his torture by the
Warlord and the odd spell fashioned to keep him from
his magic. But he lacked the strenuous stimulation, the
fear of death, that had allowed him to use a Lesser
Magic, and he could not cause the spell to work for him.
Sighing, he stood and began again to trudge northwards.

For three days he had seen the ,ice spire, rising high into
the sky above the leading edge of a great glacier. Now
he trudged up to a high rise and gauged his distance.
Transporting himself without a known location, a pattern
to focus his mind upon, was dangerous unless he could
see his destination. He picked a small outcropping of
rock before what seemed to be an entrance and incanted
a spell.
Suddenly he stood before what was clearly a door into
' an ice tower, fashioned by some arcane art. At the door
appeared a robed figure. It moved silently and with grace,
and was tall, but nothing of its features could be seen in
the deep dark of its hood.
Pug waited and said nothing. The Thun were obviously
frightened of these creatures, and while Pug had little
fear for himself, a blunder could cost him the only source
of aid he could think of to help stem the Enemy. Still, he
was ready to defend himself instantly if necessary.
As winds whipped snowflakes in swirls about him, the
robed figure motioned for Pug to follow and turned back
into the door. Pug hesitated a moment, then followed the
robed figure into the spire.
Inside the spire were stairs, carved into its walls. The
spire itself seemed to be fashioned from ice, but somehow
there was no cold here, in fact, the spire seemed almost
warm after the bitter wind of the tundra. The stairs led
up, towards the pinnacle of the spire, and down, into the
ice. The figure was vanishing down the stairs, almost out
of sight when Pug entered. Pug followed. They descended
what seemed an impossible distance , as if their destination
lay far below the glacier. When they halted, Pug was
certain they were many hundreds of feet below the
surface.
At the bottom of the stairs they came to a large door,
fashioned from the same warm ice as the walls. The
figure moved through the door, and again Pug followed.
What he saw on the other side caused him to halt,
dumbfounded.
Below the mighty edifice of ice, in the frozen wastes of
the Arctic of Kelewan, was a forest. Moreover, it was a
forest like none upon Kelewan, and Pug's heart raced as
he beheld mighty oaks and elms, ash and pine. Dirt, not
ice, lay under his boots, and all around a soft, gentle light
was diffused by the green branches and flowers. Pug's
guide pointed towards a path and again took the lead.
Deep in the forest they came to a large clearing. Pug had
never seen the like of the sight before him, but he knew
there was another place, a far distant place, that looked
much as this did. In the centre of the clearing, gigantic
trees rose, with mighty platforms erected amid them,
connected by roads upon the backs of branches. Silver,
white, gold, and green leaves all seemed to glow with
mystic light.
Pug's guide raised his hands to his hood and slowly
lowered it. Pug's eyes widened in wonder, for before
him stood a creature unmistakable to one reared upon
Midkemia. Pug's expression was one of open disbelief
and he was nearly speechless. Before him stood an old
elf, who with a slight smile said, 'Welcome to Elvardein,
Milamber of the Assembly. Or would you prefer to be
Called Pug of Crydee? We have been expecting you.'
"I prefer Pug,' he half whispered. He was able to
muster up only a shred of his composure, so shocked was
he to find Midkemia's second most ancient race living
among this impossible forest, deep in the ice of an alien
planet.
'What is this place? Who are you, and how did you know I was coming here?'

'We know many things, son of Crydee. You are here
because it is time for you to face that greatest of terrors,
what you call the Enemy. You are here to learn. We are
here to teach.'
"Who are you?'
The elf motioned Pug towards a gigantic platform.
"There is much you must learn. A year shall you abide
with us, and when you leave, you will come to power
and understanding you only glimpse now. Without that
teaching, you will not be able to survive the coming
battle. With it, you may save two worlds.' Nodding as
Pug moved forwards, the elf fell in beside him. "We are a
race of elvenkind long vanished from Midkemia. We are
the eldest race of that world, servants to the Vallheru,
those whom men called the Dragon Lords. Long ago did
we come to this world, and for reasons you shall learn we
chose to abide here. We watch for the return of that
which has brought you to us. We prepare against the day
we see the return of the Enemy. We are the eldar.'
Stunned by this, Pug could only wonder. Silently he
entered the twin of the city of elves, Elvandar, the place
deep in the ice that the eldar had called Elvardein.

Arutha strode down the hall. Lyam walked at his side.
Behind them hurried Volney, Father Nathan, and Father
Tully. Fannon, Gardan and Kasumi, Jimmy and Martin,
Roald and Dominic, Laurie and Carline all followed in a
pack. The Prince still had on the stained and tattered
travel clothing he had worn on the ship from Crydee.
They had had a fast, and blessedly uneventful, journey.
Two guards still waited without the room Pug had
ensorcelled. Arutha motioned for them to open the door.
When it was open, he waved them aside, and with
the hilt of his sword, he smashed the seal as Pug had
instructed.
The Prince and the two priests hurried to the Princess's
bedside. Lyam and Volney kept the rest outside. Nathan
opened the vial containing the curative fashioned by the
elver Spellweavers. As instructed, he poured a drop upon
Anita's lips. For a moment nothing happened, then the
Princess's lips flickered. Her mouth moved, and she licked
the drop from her lips. Tully and Arutha held her up,
Nathan raised the vial to her mouth and poured. She
drank it all.
Before their eyes colour returned to Anita's cheeks.
As Arutha knelt at her side, her eyes fluttered and
opened. She turned her head slightly, and said, 'Arutha,'
in almost a silent whisper. Her hand gently came and
touched his cheek as tears of thanks ran unashamedly
down his face. He took her hand and kissed it.
Then Lyam and the others were in the room. Father
Nathan rose and Tully barked, "only a minute, now! She
has to rest.'
Lyam laughed, his loud happy laugh. "Listen to him.
Tully, I'm still the King.'
Tully said, 'They may make you Emperor of Kesh,
King of Queg, and Grand Master of the Brothers of the
Shield of Dala as well, for all I care. To me you'll always
be one of my less-gifted students. A moment, then out
you go.' He turned away, but as with the others, his face
was wet.
The Princess Anita looked around at all the smiling
faces and said, 'What happened?' She sat up and with a
wince said, 'Oh, I hurt,' then smiled an embarrassed
smile. "Arutha, what did happen? All I remember was
turning to you at the wedding . . .'
'i'll explain later. You rest, and I'll see you again
soon.'
She smiled and yawned, covering her mouth. 'Excuse
me. But I am sleepy.' She snuggled down and was soon
asleep.
Tully began shooing them from the room. Outside,
Lyam said, 'Father, how soon before we can finish this
wedding?'
'in a few days,' said Tully. 'The restorative powers of
that mixture are phenomenal.'
"Two weddings,' said Carline.
Lyam said, "I was going to wait until we returned to
Rillanon.'
'Not on your best horse's rump,' snapped Carline. "I'm
taking no chances.' 'Well, Your Grace,' said the King to Laurie, 'I guess

it's been decided.'
Laurie said,  "'Your Grace"?'
With a laugh and a wave, as he walked away, Lyam
said, 'Of course, didn't she tell you? I can't have my
sister married to a commoner. I'm naming you Duke of
Salador.'
Laurie looked more shaken than before. "Come along,
love,' said Carline, taking him by the hand. 'You'll
survive. '
Arutha and Martin laughed, and Martin said, 'Have
you noticed the peerage has been going to hell lately?'
Arutha turned to Roald. 'You were in this for gold,
but my thanks go beyond mere gold. A bonus you shall
have. Volney, this man is to have a bag of a hundred
gold sovereigns, our agreed-upon price. Then he is to
have ten times that as bonus. And then another thousand
for thanks.'
Roald grinned. 'You are generous, Highness.'
"And if you'll accept, you're welcome to be my guest

here as long as you wish. You might even find it in your
heart to consider joining my guard. I've a captaincy about
to open.'
Roald saluted. 'Thunks, but no, Your Highness. I've
thought of late it was time to settle down, especially after
this last business, but I have no ambitions to enlist.'
"Then feel free to guest with us as long as you desire.

I'll instruct the Royal Steward to prepare a suite for your
use . '
With a grin, Roald said, "My thanks, Highness.'
Gardan said, 'Does that remark about a new captaincy
mean I'm finally done with this duty and can return to
Crydee with His Grace?'
Arutha shook his head. "Sorry, Gardan. Sergeant
Valdis will become captain of my guard, but no retirement
for you yet. From those reports of Pug's you brought
from Stardock, I'm going to need you around. Lyam is
about to name you Knight-Marshal of Krondor.'
Kasumi clapped Gardan upon the back. 'Congratulations,
Marshal.'
Gardan said, 'But . . .'
Jimmy cleared his throat in expectation. Arutha turned
and said, 'Yes, Squire?'
cWell, I thought . . .'

'You had something to ask?'
Jimmy looked from Arutha's face to Martin's. "Well
just thought as long as you were passing out rewards . . .'
'Oh yes, of course.' Turning, Arutha spotted one of
the squires and shouted, "Locklear!'
The young squire came running to bow before his
Prince. 'Highness?'
'Escort Squire Jimmy back to Master deLacy and
inform the Master of Ceremonies that Jimmy is now
Senior Squire.'
Jimmy grinned as he and Locklear walked away. He
seemed about to say something, then thought better of it
and followed Locklear.
Martin put his hand on' Arutha's shoulder. 'Keep an
eye on that boy. He seriously means to be Duke of
Krondor someday.'
Arutha said, 'Damn me if he just might not do it.'
Epilogue
Retreat

The moredhel silently raged.
To the three chieftains before him he betrayed no hint
of his anger. They were leaders of the most important
lowland confederations. As they approached, he knew
what they would say before it was spoken. He listened
patiently, the light from the large bonfire before his
throne casting a flicker across his chest, giving the illusion
of movement to the birthmark dragon there.
'Master,' said the centremost chieftain, 'my warriors
grow restless. They chafe and they complain. When shall
we invade the southlands?'
The Pantathian hissed, but a restraining gesture from
the leader quieted him. Murmandamus sat back in his
throne and silently brooded on his setback. His finest
general lay dead, irretrievable even to those powers
at his command. The balking clans of the north were
demanding action, while the mountain clans were drifting
away by the day, confounded by Murad's death. Those
who had come from the southern forests whispered among
themselves of travelling the lesser passes back into the
lands of men and dwarves, seeking to return to their
homelands in the foothills near the Green Heart and
among the highland meadows of the Grey Towers. Only
the hill clans and the Black Slayers remained steadfast,
and they were too small a force, despite their ferocity.
No, the first battle had been lost. The chieftains before
him demanded some promise, some sign or portent, to
reassure their nervous alliances, before old feuds erupted.
Murmandamus knew he could hold the armies here for
only a few more weeks without marching. This far north,
there were only two short months of warm weather left
before the fall, then quickly the harsh northern winter
would strike. If war was not forthcoming, to bring booty
and plunder, the warriors would soon need to return to
their homes. Finally Murmandamus spoke.
'O my children, the auguries are not in fruition.'
Pointing above, to stars seen faintly against the glare of
the camp's fires, he continued. 'The Cross of Fire heralds
only the beginning. But we have not reached the time.
Cathos says the fourth Bloodstone is not yet properly
aligned. The lowest star will be in proper position at the
summer solstice, next year. We cannot hurry the stars.'
Inwardly he raged at the dead Murad for having failed
him in so critical a mission. "We trusted our fate to one
who acted too swiftly, who may have been uncertain in
his resolve.' The chieftains exchanged glances. All knew
Murad as one above reproach in visiting destruction on
the hated humans. As if reading their minds, Murmandamas
said, 'For all his might, Murad underestimated the
Lord of the West. That is why this human is to be feared,
why he must be destroyed. With his death, the way south
becomes open, for then shall we visit destruction upon all
who oppose our will.'
Standing, he said, "But the time is not yet. We shall
wait. Send home your warriors. Let them prepare against
winter.' But carry forth the word: let all the tribes and
clans gather here next summer, let the confederations
march with the sun when it again begins its journey
south. For next Midsummer's Day, the Lord of the West
shall die.' His voice rose in volume. "We were tested
against the powers of our forefathers and found wanting.
We were judged guilty of failing in our resolve. We shall
not again so fail.' He struck fist to palm, his voice rising
to a near-shriek. 'in a year's time we shall bring forth the
news that the hated Lord of the West is destroyed. Then
shall we march. And we shall not march alone. We shall
call our servants, the goblins, the mountain trolls, the
land-striding giants. All shall come to serve us. We shall
march into human lands and burn their cities. I shall
erect my throne upon a mountain of their bodies. Then,
O my children, shall we spill blood.'
Murmandamus gave permission for the chieftains to
withdraw. This year's campaign was at an end. Murmandamas
signalled to his guards to attend him as he swept
past the crooked form of the serpent priest. Silently he
brooded upon Murad's death and the loss that death had
caused. The Cross of Fire would look much as it did now
for the next year and a bit more, so the lie about the
configuration would hold. But time was now an enemy.
A winter would be spent in preparation, and remembrance.
No, this defeat would rankle as the freezing
nights of winter slowly passed, but those nights would see
the birth of another plan, which would bring the death of
the Lord of the West, he who was the Bane of Darkness.
And with that death, the onslaught against the nations of
men would begin, and the killing would not halt until all
lay prostrate at the feet of the moredhel, as was proper.
And the moredhel would serve one master, Murmandamas.
He turned and faced those most loyal to him. In
the flickering light of their torches, madness danced in his
eyes. His voice was the only sound in the ancient halls, a
harsh whisper that grated upon the ear. "How many
human slaves have our raiders captured to pull our siege
engines?'
One of the captains said, "Several hundred, Master.'
'Kill them all. At once.'
The captain ran to carry out the order, and Murmandamas
felt a lessening of the rage within as the prisoners'
deaths atoned for Murad's failure. In near-hissing tones,
Murmandamus said, "We have erred, O my children. Too
soon did we gather to regain that which is rightfully our
heritage. In a year, when the snows again have melted
from the peaks, we again will gather, and then shall all
who oppose us know terror.' He paced about the hall, a
figure of stunning power, a fey brilliance surrounding him
in an almost perceptible halo. His magnetism was nearly
palpable. After a silent time, he spun towards the Pantathian. "
We leave. Prepare the gate.'
The serpent nodded, while the Black Slayers took their
positions along the wall. When each was situated in a
niche, . a field of green energy surrounded them. Each
became rigid, a statue in his private nook, awaiting the
summons that would come next summer.
The Pantathian finished a long incantation and a shimmering
silver field appeared in the air. Without another
word, Murmandamus and the Pantathian stepped through
the gate, leaving Bar-Sargoth for some place known only
to himself and Cathos. The gate winked out of existence.
Silence dominated the hall. Then, outside, the screams
of the dying prisoners began to fill the night .

End

The final confrontation between Arutha and Murmandamas,
as well as Pug and Tomas's search for Macros the
Black, is chronicled in A Darkness at Sethanon, published
by Grafton.

