The Straddling CheckerBoard is a fractionating cipher. It breaks the letters into seperate parts by an X and Y value. This priciple is also used on the Bifid and Trifid cipher. The advantage of the Straddling Checkerboard is the way of distributing the parts. The commonly used letters have only one value, the other letters two value. This improves the resistance to letter frequency analyse. This cipher is often combined with a transposition cipher to make it stronger.

The Straddling Checkerboard is a table of 3 rows with each 10 letters. The first row contains the 8 highest frequency letters and 2 blanks. The 2nd and 3th row contain the rest of the alphabet, a point and a space.

We write out the key as column header. The first 10 letters of the key are numbered by alphabetic order, the last letter gets the number 0. If two letters of the key are the same, the first in the key gets the lowest number.

The rows receive the same number as the empty fields in the first row.

Plain text: THIS IS A SECRET
Key       : INDEPENDEN(CE)

 |I N D E P E N D E N
 |6 7 1 3 0 4 8 2 5 9
-+-------------------
 |A T   O N E   S I R
1|B C D F G H J K L M
8|P Q U V W X Y Z .  

To encipher a letter on the top row we replaced by the number labelling its column. A Letters on the other rows is replaced by its row number, then column number:

Plain text: T  H  I  S     I  S     A      S  E  C  R  E  T 
Code text : 7  14 5  2  89 5  2  89 6  89  2  4  17 9  4  7 

Next, the message is written in groups of five:

Cipher text: 71452 89528 96892 41794 7 

Note that on this cipher we can use spaces and full stops.

To decode the message we reconstruct the table. When reading off the numbers, we know weither a number has one or two figures by looking at the row numbers. If the number starts with one of the row numbers, the letter is composed by two numbers, the crossing between row and column number. In other cases the letter is found in the first row.

There are several variation on the straddling checkerboard, such as a fixed numbering, where the letters are filled in by a keyword, or with more rows (each row means a blank more in the first row).